       Air-Photography in Northern Ireland
                             by D. A. CHART


0
      N the suggestion of Rev. L. P. Murray, and influenced by the
        discoveries made at Stonehenge and elsewhere by means of
        air-photography , the Ancient Monuments Advisory Committee
for Northern Ireland, at a meeting held 27 April 1927, agreed to pursue
similar investigations in the Province. The Ministry of Finance, which
in regard to Ancient Monuments corresponds to H.M. Office of Works
in England, gave its support and asked the Air Ministry for its co-
operation. This was readily accorded, and 502 Ulster (Bombing)
Squadron of the Royal Air Force stationed at Aldergrove, co. Antrim,
was instructed to give assistance, so far as was consistent with its ordinary
duties. Valuable help was given by Wing Commander A. Claud
Wright and the Squadron under his command, and the results have
been decidedly interesting.
     At first attention was directed rather to the elucidation of various
points concerned with the leading monuments of the country, most of
which are in the Ministry’s care-for instance the extent and plan of
vanished buildings of Devenish, Inch and other abbeys, and the sites
of suspected Celtic churches near the Round Towers at Antrim and at
Maghera (co. Down). No very striking discovery was made in the
course of these investigations, but tentative photographs of another type
of monument, the great ring fort at Navan, co. Armagh, showed that
excellent results were likely to be achieved by the study of the earth-
works which are so numerous in Northern Ireland. The R.A.F. officers
themselves endorsed this view, and pointed out that the vicinity of their
own aerodrome was extremely rich in such remains. Some of these
which were visible from the air were not marked on the Ordnance Survey
as antiquities, or even as natural features. In other cases air-photography
revealed unmistakable earthwork sites in places where neither written
record nor popular tradition had reported their existence. It was
thought proper, accordingly, to concentrate on this side of the work,
and particularly to devote attention to three large constructions of this
kind, which have long provided problems for archaeologists.
                                    453
                             ANTIQUITY
     The first place selected was the fort at Navan, already mentioned,
which is the ancient Emania,and is believed to have been the palace of
the Kings of Ulster from about 300 B.C. to A.D. 330, celebrated in the
romantic stories of Deirdre, Cuchullin, and the Red Branch Knights.
I t was hoped that the sites of buildings might be traced within the great
round enclosure, other than the high mound and small rath already
known to exist; also that outworks and tracks might be found, as at
Stonehenge. A photographic mosaic was made of the ring and its
vicinity, the central portion of which is shown on plate 11. Although
the details are very clear, no striking addition to knowledge has so far
been made in the central part. About 550 yards to the eastward and
beside the main road to Armagh the mosaic shows a dark circular
marking (not included in the plate). This, on examination, was found
to be a low, circular, green mound in a field, composed, according to the
testimony of the owner, of small stones, in contrast to the rest of the
field which is marshy. It is about 80 yards in diameter, and its
highest point is 2 to 3 feet above the general level. Itsvegetation on
the day of inspection appeared to be shorter and brighter of tint than the
rushy growths around. The owner also stated that a brook which runs
beside the mound had, within his recollection, encircled it. This may
have been some kind of outwork or cattle enclosure connected with
the main fort. A less definite smaller marking was seen close to this
mound but a little to the north. The mosaic shows other details of
a rather indefinite type, the most notable being a dark circle just outside
and to the west of the great ring beside letter F in plate XI, but nothing
corresponding to this could be traced on the ground. Anticipations
that tracks might be found leading towards Armagh and the old Ulster
frontier near Dundalk were not realized. These tracks may, however,
survive in the form of laneways.
      I n the south of county Armagh the large, but little known and
hitherto rather indefinite entrenchment at the Dorsey ,lying on the main
road between Armagh and Dundalk, was very clearly photographed
from the air, and a mosaic constructed, the centre of which is shown as
plate I. The picture gives a far clearer conception of this striking
work than has yet been obtained. It is a system of rainparts and
trenches lying across one of the entrances into Ulster from the south.
 The name of the locality, ' Dorsey ', indicates that it was regarded by
 the ancient Irish as a gate. Although the entrenchment is spread over a
 tract of land about 1800yards long by from 350 to 600 yards wide, there
 are breaks in its continuity. Supposing it to have been an enclosed
                                   454
45 5
                             ANTIQUITY
fortification, its perimeter would have been enormous-at least three
miles-and several thousand men would have been required for its
defence. Furthermore the supposed enclosure is cut in two by a large
bog and is pierced by several streams. Although its situation and con-
struction are, generally speaking, advantageous from the military point
of view, it has no very regular plan, but wanders over hill and dale in a
manner which suggests a boundary or a barrier rather than a stronghold.
Various questions arose :-
      (I) Was it a continuous enclosure or merely two parallel lines of
defence of which the first or southward was much stronger than that to
the north;
      (2) Was it part of a travelling earthwork, and, if so, could it be
linked up with any other similar constructions on either side.
      Air-photography has revealed with some certainty and completeness
that it was definitely an enclosure and has thrown new light 011 the second
question. (See plate I).
      The line of the entrenchment is shown on Mr T.F. 0.Rippingham’s
tracing (fig. I ) and has been confirmed on the ground throughout its
length. By a fortunate chance Flying Officer Ellison, who had taken
many of the photographs, was on leave in Armagh and was able to
cooperate in this part of the work. The continuity of the enclosure is
shown by the existence everywhere of vestiges perceptible to the aerial
camera, except in situations where the construction of an earthen
 barrier was extremely difficult, as in bog or rocky ground. But even
 here the indications, though not apparent in the air-photograph, were
 not completely absent, for the ground party, at the southwestern corner
 where the entrenchment approached a bog, was fortunate enough to
 find six inches under the surface a large oaken timber shaped like a pile
 and blackened with long submersion in the swampy soil. Such timbers
 have often been found in similar positions elsewhere in the entrench-
 ment, and it is a legitimate deduction that the earthwork crossed
 swampy ground by some kind of stockade carried on piles. Similarly,
 on rocky ground thinly covered with earth, as in the middle of the
 picture (see fig. I ) , the abundance of loose weathered stones suggests
 the erection of defences of dry piled stone in lieu of an earthwork. The
 original defences in such cases,except where they survive as field bound-
 aries, have probably been carried away piecemeal as building material.
      The air-photographs are inconclusive as regards the connexion
 of the Dorsey with other travelling earthworks. The appearances in
 the bog to the west of the main entrenchment were either indiscernible
                                   456
      PLATE I1




                             rL
                             0




I W




                 facing p. 456
PIATE I11




            B
            B
            0
            Q
PLATE 1V
THREE EARTHWORK SITES AT BALLYGINNIFF, NEAR ALDERGROVE : T H E SITE A T THE TOP O F THE ILLUSTRATION IS WITHIN
                                          300 YARDS O F LOUGH NEAGH
                                 By permission of lhe A i r Council, Crown copyrrght rsserved
OVERLAPPING RATHS, GLENLOUGHAN, NEAR SCARVA, co. DOWN
       By permission of the Air Council, Crown copy~ightresetved
PI,ATE VII
       AIR PHOTOGRAPHY I N NORTHERN IRELAND
on the ground or resolved themselves into natural outcrop. Turf was
actually being cut in this bog at the time of inspection but the cutters,
on being asked whether they had found any large oak timbers similar
to those found at the southwestern angle, replied that they had found
no timber but the usual willow. T o the east of the main entrenchment
a curious spur or flanker appears to run down to the river (marked as
‘low mound leading to swamp ’ in fig. I), but on inspection no evidence
was found that it continued across the stream, the photographic
appearance on that side being due to the overflow from a well.
     The general trend of ground verificationwill be sufficiently indicated
by a comparison of plate I with figure I .
     Although the purpose of this article is to relate what has been found
rather than to theorize from the observed facts, a single observation
may be permitted : namely, that the entrenchment was intended to block
an opening. It has on its eastern flank swampy slopes falling to a brook,
on the far side of which is scrubby and difficult foothill country rising
to the mountain mass of Slieve Gullion. On its southward side the
 ramparts are extraordinarily high, attaining to the dimensions of a
railway embankment and accompanied by very deep trenches, the
bottom of the trench often being 20 feet below the rampart top. On
this side, too, swampy ground and the course of a small stream were
utilized as part of the defence. The western flank was guarded by a
bog. On the northern side the defences are less elaborate and not so
 well-preserved as on the southern. The present main road from Dublin
 to Armagh and the northwest passes through the entrenchment. The
general conclusion appears to be that this was a frontier stronghold of a
 most elaborate and extensive kind ; perhaps also a place of refuge for the
 surrounding people and their herds ; and that the foe against whom it
 was erected was expected to come from the south. History relates that
 the kingdom, having its capital at Navan near Armagh, was destroyed
 by invaders from the south about the year A.D. 330.
      At the same time the long travelling earthwork between the
 counties of Armagh and Down, known as the Dane’s Cast, was flown
 over for the whole of its visible length, and its course noted from the air.
 Photographs of sections have been taken,of which platem is a specimen,
 showing how clearly the course of the Cast is visible to the eye of the
  camera. The problems connected with this Cast, of which a solution
 was desired, were :-
          its termination at the northern and southern ends ;
          the gap in the middle in the neighbourhood of Bessbrook.
                                     457
                            ANTIQUITY
     As regards (I), the R.A.F. officers could find no continuation
beyond Scarva, but remarked on the number and strength of the
earthworks in that neighbourhood, at what appeared to be the northward
termination of the Cast. Here, for instance, still stand the great round
forts of Lisnagade and Lisnavaragh, the larger of which is some
140 yards in diameter, both being encircled by successive deep ring
trenches. At its southern end they reported that aerial indications
showed that the Cast turned eastward towards the sea in the neigh-
bourhood of Meigh, and ended in country that was probably difficult
in the past. The gap in the middle at Bessbrook is a country of deep
valleys, and is also remarkable for abundance of earthworks. The
air-photographs of this district have added a considerable length to
the identified remains of this earthwork.
     The Squadron furthermore reported all visible appearances having
the form of earthworks, seen from the air in the immediate neighbour-
hood of their aerodrome. These are fairly numerous and many have
been investigated on the ground. At the same time the Squadron, at
the request of the Ministry, photographed some of the more striking
appearances, which they observed either there or generally on their
flights over the country.
     The site of a very large triple or quadruple ring earthwork at
Aughnamullan, about 3 miles ENE of Crumlin, co. Antrim, about
 IOO yards in diameter, is shown in plate IV. This site is a level
rushy field and there seems to be no surface indication. I n plate v an
equilateral triangle of circular earthwork sites at Ballyginniff, 3 miles
west of Aldergrove aerodrome, close to the eastern, or Antrim, shore
of Lough Neagh, is shown. None of these is marked on the Ordnance
Survey map, though the existence of one might be inferred from a
semicircular nick in the field boundary embodying part of its arc. The
sites are roughly zoo ft. in diameter, are distant 400 yards from each
other and are on level marshy ground. The fort at the nick in the
centre has the remains of an inner and outer rampart embodied in the
field boundary. That near the top edge has part of its trench in the field
boundary. That near the right hand edge of the picture is only shown
by a slight mounding of the surface.
     The study of the earthworks, as revealed from the air, confirms
the view that, although all are called ‘forts’ colloquially, many of them
could have had no military purpose. They are far too numerous, and
cases occur of overlapping, of pairs side by side, and of situations in
deep ravines which could be commanded from the surrounding hillsides,
                                   458
       AIR PHOTOGRAPHY I N NORTHERN IRELAND
      Overlapping at Glenloughan, near Scarva, co. Down, is seen in
plate VI. This was examined on the ground by the late Mr A.
Robinson, formerly Commissioner of the Office of Works, Dublin, who
reported that there can be no question as to the pair overlapping. The
rath of smaller circumference, which is the earlier, has been overlapped
by the larger to the extent of from 40 to 45 feet. They are but slightly
raised above the natural surface of the ground.
      A triple-ringed fort in a swampy valley between steeply sloping
hills is shown in plate VII. It was taken in the early days of the enquiry
when oblique photographs with a small field of view were used, and, not
including a house, road, or field of irregular shape, has hitherto proved
impossible to identify. It is known to be one of a series illustrating
earthworks between Dromore, co. Down, and Magheralin, but neither
local enquiry nor close study of the Ordnance Maps of the district have
yet been able to disclose its position. Any information would be
welcome.




                                    459
