An Iron Age ditched enclosure system at Limes Farm, Landbeach, Cambridgeshire
AILEEN CONNOR & ROG PALMER*
FIGURE 1. Vertical aerial photograph, one of a stereoscopic run, taken on a day on which crop colours showed extreme contrast. Here the unripe crops above deeper soil (ditches, pits, and natural pockets) show clearly against the yellowing background of ripening fields. (O Cambridge University Committee for Aerial Photography: 1<17-AL 132: 23 June 1976.)
FIGURE 2. Part of the 1 :2500 plan based principally on the vertical photographs, but with additions from six oblique photographs. Ditches or other cut features are red. This was used to locate excavation trenches which are overprinted in black. Modern background is omitted from this plan. (O Air Photo Services Cambridge: July 1999.)
* Connor, Archaeological Field Unit, Cambridgeshire County Council, Fulbourn Community Centre, Haggis Gap,
Fulbourn, Cambridge CBI 5HD, England. Aileen.Connor@libraries.camcnty.gov.uk Palmer, Air Photo Services, 21 Gunhild Way, Cambridge CBI 8QZ, England. rog.palmer@dial.pipex.com
ANTIQUITY 74 (2000): 281-2
282	NEWS & NOTES
  
Landbeach is a parish on the southern edge of the East Anglian Fenland — an area densely occupied in the Iron Age and Roman periods (Hall 1996: figure 67), The site at Limes Farm is situated on West Water second terrace river gravels at approximately 5.4 m above ordnance datum. On grounds of location, morphology and complexity, the site would be dated to the 'maybe Iron Age but probably Roman' period, as indeed it was by Frere & St Joseph (1983: 207—8) who chose it as an example of 'villages and native settlement sites'. Surface finds were of Roman date (Hall 1996: gazetteer).
  Features at Limes Farm were photographed in six different years between 1962 and 1980 by Cambridge University Committee for Aerial Photography, and by Air Photo Services in 1990. The site spreads across several fields and is not always wholly visible on any single date. 1976 (FIGURE 1) was an exception. These aerial photographs were used for 1:2500 scale interpretation and mapping (FIGURE 2) prior to sampling the 25-ha site to evaluate the survival of sub-surface features for County Farm management policy. Field investigation during August and September 1999 was as a training excavation under the direction of Cambridgeshire County Council Archaeological Field Unit. 
  Crop cover allowed access only to the northern part of the site in which 18 trenches were opened by machine (FIGURE 2), with two extended to form small areas. Trenches 1, 2, 3, 10 and 11 received detailed investigation: remaining trenches were described and planned, but were not excavated.
  The site was characterized by features representing timber structures, pits and intercutting ditches. Characteristically Middle fron Age pottery was recovered from most feature types in trenches 1 and 2; a small component of 'Belgic' and Roman pottery was recovered from features in trenches 10 and 11. The earliest phase of activity in trenches 1 and 2 included a complex sequence of ditches, which provided little direct dating evidence. However, these ditches were stratigraphically earlier than a Middle Iron Age occupation phase. Primary filling of these ditches appears to have been natural silts derived from the sides of the ditches. The final fills contained occupation debris including pottery, animal bones and evidence for spinning and weaving. An articulated juvenile pig burial, and deliberate deposition of cow skulls was also associated with this latest ditch-filling phase.
  A Middle Iron Age occupation phase is indicated by the presence of at least one timber building, possibly associated with several pits containing general rubbish including large pieces of unabraded pottery and animal bones. A final phase of ditches replaced the Middle Iron Age occupation and may be late Iron Age or Roman in date. To the south, in trench 10, evidence was found for ditch filling in the Roman period. The inhumation of a baby was also found associated with this phase of activity.
  The modern surface is generally flat, with remnant medieval headlands. The small amount of material collected by Hall (1996; gazetteer) was surprising from such a complex of presumed occupation enclosures and a likely explanation was that much of the site had been destroyed by recent cultivation. Excavation showed this to be incorrect. Topsoil was between m and m thick in all trenches. It overlay a m thick yellowish-brown sandy-clay deposit in several trenches; particularly noticeable in trenches 1, 2 and 10. The deposit had the character of a soil developed under stable vegetation, and was apparently unaffected by current ploughing. Thus paucity of surface finds was due to lack of plough damage.
  Similar deposits may cover sites on other gravel terraces where, probably, there is a critical slope angle that allows ploughsoil movement and facilitates damage. Future work may show that subsurface ditched sites may have better chances of undamaged survival if they are located on slopes of less than this critical angle. Investigations of plough damage to archaeological sites may care to consider ways and means by which this can be evaluated.
  A final factor to consider is that of dating. Neither use of morphological attributes to assign a date range nor the evidence of surface collection was wholly correct at Limes Farm. Roman phases were recognized (by chance?) and the long life of the enclosure system was suggested by the aerial evidence, but its Iron Age date would not have been assigned on the basis of local knowledge before these excavations.
References
FRERE, S.S. & J.K.S. ST JOSEPH. 1983. Roman Britain from the air. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
HALL, D.N. 1996. The Fenland Project, Number 10: The Isle of Elv and Wisbech. East Anglian Archaeology 79.
