Review

recent ice core evidence suggests extensive climatic desiccation, believed by some to have resulted in widespread settlement abandonment in northern Syria. Sweyhat is not the only such site, however. Nineveh, Tell Mozan and Tell Brak are among the many large sites in northern Mesopotamia and the Khabur area of Syria that also continue as extensive urban sites during this period. Occupation seems to ceasearound1950BC,andthereisevidenceofheavily eroded Hellenistic and Roman settlements, material from which is also published here.
The first of the final volumes was Tony Wilkinson’s 2004 publication of his environmental survey of the area. This second volume deals solely with the material excavated at Sweyhat in 1975-77 and 198992. Here the major emphasis is on the pottery which is presented in extensive detail, trench by trench, each locus being described separately. Other types of object are also published separately and, regrettably, there is little attempt to integrate related areas of the site. Overall summaries of results are largely missing as is assessment of reliability of context. That is, all sherds and objects are published in great detail, but it is left to the reader to assemble related data.
Recent excavations under the direction of Richard Zettler have added much to our knowledge of the site, especially in the central area of the tell which has proved to have been, in its later stages, a terraced fortress, a discovery that renders some of Holland’s stratigraphic observations redundant, especially in the context of the late third millennium (see Danti & Hafford 2008). This new information, together with a re-examination of the associated pottery, almost certainly redates one of Holland’s most interesting small finds, the terracotta horse figurine (Figure 157:6 & Plate 116). As attributed here it constitutes the earliest evidence for horse in SyroMesopotamia (most recently summarised in Oates 2003), but it would now appear simply to supplement a variety of evidence from the last century of the third millennium. On the other side of the coin, the ‘Ur III’ inscribed weight, the only written evidence so far found at the site, is now widely agreed to be earlier in date than at first supposed (now ‘late Akkadian’, p. 231).
The volumes themselves are beautifully produced but difficult to use, owing not only to their size – a total of 710 pages of text plus 675 pages of illustrations, weighing altogether over 12lb (6.1kg) perhaps justifying the price – but also to the general lack of integration of material data with interpretations of broader site contexts. The consistency of scale on the plates (virtually all at 1:50), although perhaps admirable in theory, is occasionally unfortunate. The fragments of Roman lamps on Plate 337, for example, are so small that they are virtually invisible, while most of the page remains empty. Indeed the number of partly empty pages in the volume of illustrations adds considerably to the bulk of the book. This is both a massive and a minutely detailed and beautifully illustrated publication, but it is more an excavation record with the addition of extensive comparanda than an interpretation of the site’s archaeological structure and history.
References
DANTI, M.D. & M.B. HAFFORD. 2008. The city of Sweyhat: a Mesopotamian mystery, Current World Archaeology 30(6): 34-40.
OATES, J. 2003. A note on the early evidence for horse and the riding of equids in Western Asia, in M. Levine, C. Renfrew & K. Boyle (ed.) Prehistoric steppe adaptation and the horse. Cambridge: McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research.
WILKINSON, T. J. 2004. Excavations at Tell es-Sweyhat, Syria, volume 1. On the margin of the Euphrates: settlement and land use at Tell es-Sweyhat and in the Upper Lake Assad Area, Syria (Oriental Institute Publications 124). Chicago: Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago.
ZETTLER, R.L. 1997. Subsistence and settlement in a marginal environment: Tell es-Sweyhat 1989-1995 Preliminary Report (MASCA Research Papers in Science and Archaeology 14). Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology.
JOAN OATES
McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research,
University of Cambridge, UK
(Email: jlo29@cam.ac.uk)

ANDREW J. LAWSON. Chalkland: an archaeology of Stonehenge and its region. 2007. Salisbury: Hobnob; 978-0-946418-61-9 casebound £25; 978-0-94641870-1 paperback £17.95.
It is sometimes claimed these days that some areas of Britain are over-researched, and that we need to concentrate on other regions to achieve better balance. Wessex and Orkney spring to mind. It is also sometimes argued that too much attention has been given to Neolithic monuments, and within these to some of the biggest and most impressive,
227
Reviewat the expense of both settlements and smaller constructions. Stonehenge springs to mind. Who could be against better balance? And gradually, with broader research agendas and effective action in the field of contract archaeology, a wider
coverage is being achieved, reflected, for example, in the number of regions right across Britain figured in Richard Bradley’s recent Prehistory of Britain and Ireland (see this reviewer’s account in Antiquity 82 (2008): 224-5). But what then of the supposed hotspots themselves? Are they to be neglected for a generation or more, to let everywhere else catch up, and do we really know as much about them as we think?
Chalkland gives emphatic answers. Taking the chalkland of central-southern England, and spilling over at times into the Thames valley gravels to the north (and thus generally avoiding the term ‘Wessex’ itself), Andrew Lawson gives us the long history of a region, from the Palaeolithic right through to late prehistory and beyond. Stonehenge is woven into the account as a central thread (almost literally, since it appears on grey-tone pages at intervals through the book), and is still there, as an ancient monument, in the setting of the historic landscape; there is an attractive final chapter on the intriguing diversity of the modern landscape, a ‘complex mosaic’ (p. 361) in the present that serves as a powerful metaphor for the deep past. The coverage within the broad region defined is very wide, so that although the obvious monument complexes in the Neolithic or the major excavated hillforts in the Iron Age, for example, figure prominently,thereisplentyofattentiongiventosmall settlements and occupations, and land division, over the area as a whole. In this way, Lawson shows how much more there is to chalkland archaeology than simply the major sites alone, and how much more we need to know about it, especially for the settlement record from the Mesolithic to the Early Bronze Age, and again for aspects of unenclosed settlement in the Later Bronze Age and the Iron Age.
For a book of such breadth, the detail on individual sites is impressive. There is a full account of Stonehenge itself and many of the recent discoveries from around it, from the Amesbury Archer and the Boscombe Bowmen to the work of the Stonehenge Riverside Project, and there is reference to recent formal modelling of the date of Silbury Hill and the English Heritage intervention in 2007. The summary of the complex research carried out at Stonehenge will be particularly useful for any readers coming to the topic – or literally the site – for the first time. Most of the current big ideas about how to make sense of these monuments are discussed. Lawson’s tone is both enthusiastic about the hunt for explanation and cautious about specific outcomes, for example (p. 197) on the hypothesis of ‘Stonehenge for the ancestors’. But we are also taken to less glamorous locations, like the sewage works at Newbury (for early Mesolithic occupation), the grounds of a school in Dorchester (for scattered early Neolithic pits) or a long spur of open chalk downland at Battlesbury near Warminster (for open Iron Age settlement). The same approach generates a satisfyingly broad perspective on Early Bronze Age barrows, with a detailed account of well-known sites (with a useful supporting appendix on those around Stonehenge) balanced by a matching account of many others, far beyond the major clusters on Salisbury Plain. The text is heavily illustrated with informative plans and photographs, many figuring the excavators and researchers themselves, and all the information and references look right up-to-date.
This book should find a very wide readership. It contributes to a debate about the broader sweep of British prehistory. It helps to define a continuing research agenda for the southern chalkland itself. And it offers students, visitors and general readers a readable, clear and accessible account of how the great sites and monuments of the southern chalkland fit into wider contexts and patterns.
ALASDAIR WHITTLE
School of History and Archaeology,
Cardiff University, Wales, UK
(Email: whittle@cardiff.ac.uk)

DAVID QUAMMEN (ed.). Charles Darwin ‘On the Origin of Species’ (illustrated edition). xvi+544 pages, over 350 colour illustrations. 2008. New York: Sterling; 978-1-4027-5639-9 hardback £20 & $35.
Darwin, the domesticated renegade-patriarch who stares out at us from the nation’s banknotes; there is certainly going to be a lot of him this year as it sees both the bicentenary of his birth and the 150th anniversary of his ‘big book’, On the Origin of Species. Indeed, Antiquity itself will be marking both its
228
