502	REVIEWS

and beyond the Aegean and reached sites as distant as Antigori in Sardinia and Abydos in Egypt, yet the degree of regional diversity is minimal. The pottery is remarkably uniform in character, but because there is a constant stylistic development eleven major phases can be distinguished over a period of approximately five centuries, 1550—1050 BC. The chronological potential of Mycenaean pottery was further enhanced by the publication in 1941 of Furumark's Mycenaean pottery: analysis and classification and The chronology of Mycenaean pottery. The typological system devised by Furumark is still in use and permits a standardized approach to the study of this most common class of Mycenaean artefact. But subsequent excavation and research have inevitably undermined some of Furumark's conclusions, and the LHI, LHIIIB and LHIIIC periods in particular have been the subject of radical revision. Clearly Furumark's classification is in need of an overhaul and this is one of the tasks which Mountjoy undertakes.
  This does seem an opportune moment for such a
  reappraisal in that the characteristics of each phase can be clearly defined at present, but Mountjoy has an additional aim, evident in her subtitle, which is to simplify the identification of sherds in terms of shape and motif. Those who have attempted to use Furumark to classify sherds from a settlement deposit will readily appreciate the need for assistance in this respect. The brief introduction is followed by eleven chapters, each of which covers a chronological phase. The layout of the chapters is consistent. Major assemblages of the phase in question are listed and the implications for Furumark's definition of the phase considered. There is a short resumé of the shapes in use and then a section on decoration. This does not simply present the range of motifs utilized in a particular phase but considers the disposition of the decoration on the pot, a crucial distinction because linear bands can be as diagnostic as motifs. There follows a list of motifs arranged by Furumark number. The most common motifs are described and illustrated. More of the variants could have been included and the illustrations sometimes suffer from excessive reduction, The section on the correlation of shapes and motifs is particularly useful since this is not as explicitly set out by Furumark. Much of each chapter consists of a detailed discussion of the shapes in use in the phase. Again Furumark's typology is retained but his often arcane terminology is rejected. This seems sensible although the demise of the depressed stirrup jar must be regretted. Each shape is clearly illustrated and the description stresses those characteristics which permit identification and possible misidentifications. An appendix discusses the development of shapes, and charts indicate their chronological range. Finally there is a concordance of the shapes in English, German, French, Italian and Greek, which ought to ensure that this excellent compendium becomes the standard text on Mycenaean pottery.
                              CHRISTOPHER MEE Department of Ancient History & Classical Archaeology, University of Liverpool
Aubrey Burl. The Stonehenge people: life and death at the world's greatest stone circle. London: Dent, 1987. xvi + 249 pages, 12 figures, 29 plates, 15 tables. E16 hardback.
Rodney Castleden. The Stonehenge people: an exploration of life in neolithic Britain 4700—2000 BC. London & New York: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1987. 282 pages, 76 figures, 42 plates. E14.95 hardback.
The timing of two such choices of title is unfortunate but in many ways represents one of the few areas of direct similarity between the two books. This in itself is surprising as both draw heavily on the rather restricted, and very well-used repertoire of archaeological 'facts' relating to Stonehenge itself. Both books unfortunately bear the same hallmarks of 1980s archaeological literature; the copious and occasionally pertinent quotes, and chapter headings which are either alliterative, precious or simply incomprehensible.
  Burl's book unfortunately does not bear comparison with his Prehistoric Avebury, a problem more of form than of content. Leaving aside matters of presentation, however, there are many areas of interpretation where his views seem perhaps a little too traditional. The earlier phases of the Neolithic are seen as firmly agricultural, neolithic round barrows are fairly summarily dismissed, and we still apparently have Beaker invasions. There are many other points of view with which one could take exception, but the main criticism must lie not so much with these but with the way in which some empirical data have been used.
REVIEWS	503  Imagination, with which Aubrey Burl is certainly not under-endowed, is vital in order to grasp the nature ofthe society that created Stonehenge, but this does not give those with adequate vision the right to abuse the data, gently massaging the reported truths into a form acceptable to their ideas. In this book Burl's preoccupation with Stonehenge as a monument of the dead necessitates some liberties, and thus Atkinson's 'possible, but even probable' Phase I timber structure rapidly becomes an 'enormous', 'thatched' , 'charnel house', Moving on to later phases, the suggested use of Stonehenge Ill for corpse exposure 'for a few hours or a few days' is a possibility, as are a large number of other archaeologically irrecoverable activities. Speculation about their nature is fruitless, confident statements that they did occur are misleading. It is also far from clear why the juxtaposition of a flat disc of chalk and a chalk ball should be 'yet another reminder of the henge's death links'.
  A more fundamental area of concern however, is Burl's Grooved Ware association for Stonehenge after its phase of abandonment. Grooved Ware, first noted as a pottery without association, immediately contradicted by a list of its stronger associations, has never featured very strongly at Stonehenge. Six sherds does not compare very favourably with the volume recovered from Durrington Walls or Woodhenge and the 'legitimation' by re-use of Stonehenge seems much more likely to be associated with an alternative ceramic tradition.
  Having suggested some of the more disconcerting areas of Burl 's approach and interpretation, it must be asked if the book succeeds in its stated aim of building up a vivid picture of the lives, activities and social structures of the people of Stonehenge. In this reviewer's opinion it does not. Aubrey Burl's knowledge is undoubtedly encyclopaedic and his narrative skills when they do not stray towards the flamboyant have been used to good effect in his earlier works. Here neither seem to animate either the people or the period and one is left with the impression of a book falling between two reader groups, too general and perhaps traditional for most archaeologists yet not in a truly 'popular' format or style. Devoid of its copious iconography, the archaeology of Stonehenge and by extension its 'people' cannot yet seem to fill a book without considerable support and speculation.
  Castleden ('sane, confident and readable' publisher's information) must surely go down in history as the man who gave us the term Stonehengers' (or has it been used before?). A geographer and geomorphologist by training, his confidence has enabled him to produce a new synthesis of the neolithic culture of Britain. With the exception of Renfrew, and ironically Burl, Castleden is clearly not impressed by archaeologists, or by prehistorians, a group which he seems not to consider archaeologists. Archaeologists are traditionally preoccupied with stones and potsherds, 'the solid finds that they are most at home with ' , and work within 'rather narrowly defined boundaries that prevent them getting beyond the purely concrete aspects of the culture'. When added to this we find prehistorians who, in wanting to present the Stonehenge people as primitive savages (do we?) , 'smile with satisfaction as they point derisively at their pottery', some aspects of the book's tone become apparent.
  If this book was sound in its basic use of data, which it is not, then it would be possible to forgive some of the more condescending references to the shortcomings of archaeological interpretation. The Neolithic is precisely divided into four phases spanning the period 4700—2000 BC and yet widely disparate sites, dates, finds and concepts are employed where an argument requires support.
  The book even embodies some startling misconceptions about Stonehenge itself, as the Bluestones on their arrival are hauled 'along the curving line of the Avenue', a part of the overall monument not constructed until the subsequent phase. It is also puzzling how Stonehenge can be regarded as a neolithic monument, when, unless any future radiocarbon dates radically alter our conception of its broad phases of construction, its most spectacular and enduring aspects, linked to an impressive funerary landscape, belong to what most still know as the Bronze Age.
  According to Castleden, archaeologists/ prehistorians do not address themselves to the social aspects of their study, and yet an examination of the references for his book shows a complete ignorance of the literature of social archaeology published in the 1980s. It seems strange that in 1987 anyone can publish a new synthesis of the Neolithic without apparently having read anything by Richard Bradley.
  This is a book that this reviewer found irritating, in its misuse of data, some of it his own, and also in its patronizing attitude. Unfortunately in format and some aspects of its content it will probably be more appealing to a wider audience where the benefits of widening the appeal of prehistory must be weighed against inaccuracies and misconceptions,
By the way, who were the Stonehenge people?
JULIAN RICHARDS
Trust for Wessex Archaeology, Salisbury
Barry Cunliffe et al. Hengistbury Head Dorset 1: The prehistoric and Roman settlement, 3500 BC—AD 500. Oxford: Oxford University Committee for Archaeology, 1987. Monograph 13. x + 369 pages, 256 illustrations, 8 microfiches. E40.
Hengistbury Head is a peninsula at the southern side of Christchurch harbour on the Dorset coast. Double banks and ditches cut off an area nearly two km in length and about half a km wide. Many chance finds and a whole series of excavations (by Bushe-Fox and St George Grey at the beginning of the century, and by others including John Campbell, David Peacock, Nick Barton and Barry Cunliffe most recently) have produced a substantial quantity of material, the earlier part of it not at all happily provenanced, or even now extant. Bushe-Fox published his work; in the main St George Grey did not, and Professor Cunliffe and his colleagues have achieved a major feat in cataloguing, drawing and analysing what survives of this variegated material. Bushe-Fox comes out of it rather well. His method of exploration by long thin trenches ranging widely across the site may be alarming to a generation accustomed to open area excavations (see illus. 17, 18), but Cunliffe himself points out the adavantages in this sampling strategy (cheap and
