Avebury saved?
KATE FIELDEN*
Kate Fielden, archaeologist and free-lance editor, has taken an active interest in planning at Stonehenge and Avebury since moving to Wiltshire in 1988.
  
Stonehenge and Avebury
It was enormously encouraging to read Geoffrey Wainwright's summary of present thinking and action on Stonehenge in ANTIQUITY 70 (1996). The two-stage scheme for restoration of the henge to its landscape, beginning with closure of the A344 and removal ofthe visitor-facilities to a more distant location outside the World Heritage Site, is firmly in line with British Government guidance in PPG15 (1994: 6) and the principles advanced by ICOMOS in England's first World Heritage Site management plan produced for Hadrian's Wall (English Heritage 1995: 41). Let us hope that funds may be found to complete the 'Millennium Park' scheme and ensure that the A303 trunk road is placed in a long tunnel — an entirely suitable way of heralding the millennium and paying tribute to the skill of our forebears through the best of today's engineering. Let us hope too, that the tunnel portals can be sited sufficiently far away from the ancient Avenue and Cursus not to interfere with public enjoyment of these major monuments, for they too are a vital part of a remarkable landscape (see Wainwright 1996: 10, figure 1).
FIGURE 2. The Avebury region.
1 Windmill Hill enclosure
2 Avebury stone circles
3 West Kennet Avenue
4 Course of Beckhampton Avenue
5 Long Stones
6 Faulkner's stone circle
7 Silbury Hill
8 West Kennet Long Barrow
9 The Sanctuary
10 East Kennet Long Barrow
11 Unconfirmed stone circles
12 Roman road
13 Round barrows
14 West Kennet palisaded enclosure
The present situation at Avebury
What is happening at the other half of Wiltshire's World Heritage Site? There is little chance of establishing a millennium park at Avebury, where the prehistoric landscape and monuments form part of a multi-period palimpsest of archaeological activity, inextricably associated with a living village to which access by road is a necessity.
  ANTIQUITY readers may recall Michael Pitts' (1990) lively description of the developers' circus which began at Avebury nearly a decade ago. Since then there have been decisions on the West Kennett Farm hotel and Avebury Manor theme park Inquiries, in which the World Heritage Site designation was a factor in refusing planning consent and disallowing the appeals against Enforcement Orders. Michael Heseltine, then Environment Secretary, created a precedent in refusing Scheduled Monument Consent at West Kennett Farm, against the advice of English Heritage; he considered the entirely belowground palisaded enclosure's remains 'of such archaeological importance that, in his view, their integrity should not be compromised by burial
key here
  
* 1 The Old Smithy, Alton Priors, Marlborough SN8 4JX, Wiltshire. Received 12 May 1996, accepted 25 May 1996.
ANTIQUITY 70 (1996): 503—7
504

FIGURE 3. Avebury Henge, northeast quadrant.
  Cobbling at the eastern causewayed entrance to the henge has done nothing to prevent the development of severe erosion paths which have eaten into the banks, destroying the fabric of the monument as well as its mysterious beauty.
This photograph was taken in early July 1996; a notice told visitors this path was now closed.
  
beneath further development on the application site' (decision letter, 19 December 1990). Safeguards against inappropriate development in the AveburyLocal Plan (adopted 1992) have reappeared in the new Draft Kennet District Local Plan (deposited 1994). The Avebury experience may have been instrumental in the emergence of planning guidance for World Heritage Sites in PPGI 5; the AveburyLocal Plan was helpful in forming planning policy affecting Stonehenge in the new Salisbury District Local Plan (adopted 1996). It should no longer be easy for major or inappropriate development proposals to be entertained in this World Heritage Site.
  Local campaigners were delighted when the National Trust courageously purchased Avebury Manor in 1991 and two years later the West Kennett Farm buildings without endowment, thus ensuring their protection from further planning controversies. The pressure group Avebury in Danger thankfully disbanded itself and a new Avebury Society has been formed and registered with the Civic Trust.
  Other good things have happened. The National Trust has removed most of the extraneous buildings from the Manor garden and, with new tenants installed, a programme of restoration is under way on the house. Rehabilitation of the West Kennett Farm buildings has begun, and a further land purchase has permitted almost all of the West Kennet Avenue to be grassed over for walkers. Medieval remains have been found at the Manor (Anon. 1993: 158), while recent work by the Wessex Archaeology unit and RCHME has produced further information about the Avebury area (Powell et al. 1996; Whittle forthcoming) and the unexpected find of a possible barrow within the henge (reported in this issue of ANTIQUITY). Alasdair Whittle's excavations at West Kennett have identified a large complex of prehistoric enclosures (Whittle 1993: 29— 53; and forthcoming).
  The Avebury World Heritage Site Working Party, on which relevant local and national bodies are represented, now meets regularly. Under its Chairman, Geoffrey Wainwright, work is starting on an Avebury World Heritage Site Management Plan; following recent guidelines, the Plan will, in some respects, be similar to that produced for Hadrian's Wall. One of its tasks will be to reconcile the various needs of visitors with protection of the monuments and the quality of life of the villagers.
  Numbers of visitors to Avebury have for some time been considered far too many for comfort or sustainability. The scale of erosion by walkers on the henge and Silbury Hill (supposedly closed to the public butt with fences broken through, an inviting climb) is shocking (FIGURES 3 & 4); some years ago the turf regenerated during the winter months, now it is missing on regular paths all the year round. At busy times the car parks overflow and vehicles are left all over the place, causing inconvenience to residents as well as unsightly clusters of eyecatching metalwork in the open countryside. Streams of visitors are funnelled from the main car park through a single entrance to the High Street whence they disgorge into the village and on to the nearest well-trodden patch of the henge monument. The recent and highly controversial metalling of part of the Ridgeway has sadly altered its character and makes it easier to drive and park on the Downs (The Times, 10 June 1995). The year-round visiting never stops — with casual camping on the henge, sleep-outs on Silbury Hill and sleep-ins at West Kennet Long Barrow. At the last, camp fires and candles have damaged the stones, and colourful individuals have occasionally frightened off the more conventional tourist.
  The problem of visitor-numbers is the dominant factor in discussion about tourism and the future of Avebury. Estimated at around during the 1980s (Gardner 1989: 2—3), annual visitor figures had risen to approximately 400,000 by 1992 (AvebtnyLoca1 Plan 1992: 14) and may now be over half a million. Though better facilities and enhanced information are badly needed, the paradox is that their provision will undoubtedly encourage more people [o the site, who may then stay for longer 10 enjoy them adding 10 [he effects of overcrowding which include erosion of the monuments and of lhe special experience which visitors hope

FIGURE 4. Sill)t11Y Ilill, July 1996.
   This colossal and enigmatic prehistoric mound, designated as a Site of Special Scientific Interest for its wild flora, is deeply scarred by climbers' paths. Despite its closure to the public for some years, notices are ignored and fencing is repeatedly broken through. New sections in the chestnut paling fence show where the defences have most recently been repaired.
to encounter at Avebury. Disciplined fact-finding for the World Heritage Site Management Plan should provide the data and survey statistics on which sensible visitor-management may be based. Nonc too soon, for one of the leading players is beginning to jump the gun.
506
The National Trust's proposals
In 1994 English Heritage passed over the management, for the nation, of the Avebury monuments in its care, together with the Keiller Museum, to the National Trust. The Trust now owns and manages some 600 hectares (1500) acres at Avebury, about a quarter of the World Heritage Site; its holdings do not form a coherent whole and not all ofthe inhabitants are Trust tenants; it owns most of the henge but not the village. Other bodies are taking a close interest in the place. Even so, the Trust must plan for short- and long-term management of its land, and day-to-day management of the principal monuments and, to some extent, the visitors and their impact. All of this demands a sensitive approach, unique to Avebury; it cannot be easy, especially when it is almost impossible to charge for entry to the site and there may be a shortfall owing to lack of endowment.
  In November 1995 the Trust produced a draft property management plan for limited consultation. There were many good proposals though villagers argued strongly against the introduction of extensive areas of grassland, involving a major change in farming practic:e. The people who live at Avebury like to see the changing seasons reflected in the cornfields and the wildlife they harbour; they do not want to be surrounded by a landscape 'fossilized' as an appropriate setting' for the monuments. The Draft Plan was, however, widely welcomed and the opportunity for an exchange of views was appreciated.
  At the beginning of 1996 media announcements revealed that the Trust had applied for a Millennium Fund grant for a high-tech museum in the Great Barn, close to the Manor (e.g. Wiltshire Gazette & Herald, 15 February 1996). The barn is at present appropriately let to the Wiltshire Rural Life Society for a rural life museum with about 11,000 paying visitors annually (Alan MacKichan, Chairman, pers. comm.), and a shop and useful tourist information centre receiving another 100,000 or so casual visitors a year (Wendy Gallop, Manageress, pers. comm.). Comments were made, in response to the Trust's Draft Plan, about the unsuitability of developing a strong focal point for visitors in the centre of the village but, in the absence of much detail, no one could have anticipated the nature or full implications of the new proposals. Paying visitors to the new museum could, presumably, be expected to be in excess of 100,000 a year — many thousands more than the 70,000 apparently projected by the former owner of the Manor for his theme park (Gardner 1989: 3). The notion of a virtual Neolithic reality installation in a 17th-century thatched barn next to the real thing may be anathema to some, but with hands-on experience — and more at the nudge of a roller ball — the project is undoubtedly an exciting one. Described as a 'major' centre, the scheme is seen as 'dramatically improving the enjoyment, education and entertainment offered to visitors and reaching out to new audiences, both at home and abroad' (National Trust Magazine 78 (Summer 1996): 10). It would certainly become an attraction in its own right, bringing even more all-year-round visitors and adding to already intolerable pressures. Tour-operator enquiries have now begun (W. Gallop, pers. comm.). If further facilities were to follow in time, the whole complex would amount to a large visitor-centre in the middle of Avebury. The Trust, which stands to make a comfortable (and genuinely needed) profit, might argue that a new museum and enhanced information are necessary, and that their scheme would be reversible, but none of these is the point at issue.
  Experience has already shown that it is a mistake to provide new attractions in the centre of Avebury. Neither the Disney-apparatus of the heritage industry in high-tech mode, nor any other form of 'improved' visitor-facility — such as an unwelcome scheme for an extensively cobbled formal entrance to the henge and a row of information panels in the High Street — should be shoe-horned into the heart of the village and the World Heritage Site. Indeed, the established on-site solution for visitor provision at heritage properties, as now rejected for Stonehenge, cannot be right for Avebury either.
The right way ahead?
Much the best answer would be to follow current thinking at Stonehenge, where it has been recognized that the visitor centre and all the pressures that go with it must be far enough away from the resource not to damage it or the visitors' experience: a view expressed by Michael Pitts in 1990. How far this might be achieved at Avebury will almost certainly be considered by the Avebury Working party once its initial researches have been completed. No doubt the contentious issue of a bypass will be raised again — a road which must be a detour well away from the place rather than just a village bypass if it is not to damage this exceptional landscape. Perhaps a visitor-centre, car park and museum might be linked in some way to such a detour-route, with provision of parkand-ride for visitors. Better still might be a combined visitor-centre and museum in the near-by town of Devizes where local traders, including hoteliers, could also benefit from the enterprise.
  Whatever decisions of this kind are made — and however long it takes to reach them 
References
ANONYMOUS. 1993. Excavation and fieldwork in Wiltshire 1991, Wiltshire Archaeological & Natural History Magazine 86: 158—64.
Avebury Local Plan. September 1992, Devizes: Kennet District Council.
ENGLISH HERITAGE. 1995. Hadrian's Wall Military Zone World Heritage Site draft management plan, Newcastle-uponTyne: English Heritage.
GARDNER, D.T. 1989. Avebury: development proposals at Avebury Manor. Report of the Director of Planning & Highways to the Planning & Environment Committee, 18 January. Trowbridge: Wiltshire County Council.
HESELTINE, M. 1990. West Kennett Farm Inquiry decision letter from S.T. McQuillin & T.E. Radice (for Secretary of State for the Department of the Environment) to Christopher & Jackie Gill Associates: ref. SW/P/5407/21/74 & 270/199; HSD/9/2/1517 Pt 3 & 2004; 19 December.
Kennet Local Plan Deposit Draft. 1994. Devizes: Kennet District Council.
they should arise from an agreed management plan for the whole of the World Heritage Site. Despite the new protective measures, Avebury is yet again vulnerable to inappropriate development proposals. The overriding problem of avoiding more damage from intensified overvisiting must be solved. Precipitate introduction of schemes which work against the rational accommodation and distribution of visitors will inevitably lead to further damage and compromise the process of finding best solutions. Who will be the green force at Avebury if the National Trust turns developer?
PITTS, M. 1990. What future for Avebury?, Antiquity 64: 259— 74.
POWELL, A.B., MJ. ALLEN & 1. BARNES. 1996. Archaeology in the Avebury area, Wiltshire: recent discoveries along the line of the Kennet foul sewer pipeline, 1993. Salisbury: Wessex Archaeology. Report 8.
PPG15. 1994. Department of the Environment and Department of National Heritage. Planning Policy Guidance: Planning and the Historic Environment (PPG 15). London: HMSO.
Salisbury District Local Plan. 1996. Salisbury: Salisbury District Council.
WAINWRIGHT, 1996. Stonehenge saved? , Antiquity 70: 9— 12.
WHITTLE, A. 1993. The Neolithic of the Avebury area: sequence, environment, settlement and monuments, Oxford Journal of Archaeology 12(1): 29—53.
Avebury: striking a balance
CHRISTOPHER GINGELL *
Christopher Gingell, archaeologist, is Property Manager for the National Trust at Avebury.Forthcoming. Sacred mound, holy rings: Silbury Hill and the West Kennet palisade enclosures: a Later Neolithic
  
The fascination of Avebury lies partly in the informality of the place and partly in its juxtapositions of the prehistoric, the historic and sometimes the contemporary. As change, and we hope improvement, comes slowly to the World Heritage Site, we need to remember these aspects of the spirit of the place. Free and unrestricted access to monuments leaves them vulnerable: irrelevant attractions — whether of 1980s theme park, political demonstrations in the henge or pagan occupation of West Kennet long barrow — have no place and create pressure or conflicts which imperil both conservation and the principle of access for everyone.
  At Avebury monuments lie within an occupied and working landscape. Long-standing communities have interests which they wish to protect from over-zealous pursuit of conservation objec-
  
* The National Trust, Avebury Estate Office, Alexander Keiller Museum, High Street, Avebury SN8 IRF, England.
E-mail: WAVCJG@SMTP.NTRUST.ORG.UK
Received 19 June 1996, accepted 28 June 1996.
ANTIQUITY 70 (1996): 507-11
REPORTS
  
	REPORTS	503
  
	REPORTS	503
  
