Review

It seems that Stonehenge is never far from the pages of Antiquity (see, recently, vol. 83, March 2009). Amongst its multiple components are the bluestones, whose mode of arrival at Stonehenge is a matter of discussion. Here a book which comes out in support of transport through glaciation is reviewed by a reviewer sympathetic to the thesis. Dr Williams-Thorpe was a member of the Open University team that gained permission to sample at Stonehenge in 1987 (see for example Antiquity 65 (1991): 64-73 and Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society 57 (1991): 103-14). She has carried out numerous geochemical analyses of bluestone sources, monoliths, fragments and axe-heads, and, in collaboration with colleagues at the Open University and elsewhere, has published widely on the subject.
BRIAN JOHN. The bluestone enigma: Stonehenge, Preseli and the Ice Age. 160 pages, 57 b&w & colour illustrations. 2008. Newport: Greencroft Books; 9780-905559-89-6 paperback £9.95.
The word ‘bluestone’ provokes strong emotions. It should simply be a fascinating academic debate: did the famous bluestones, clearly foreign to the chalk geology of Salisbury Plain, arrive in the vicinity of Stonehenge through an astonishing feat ofprehistoricingenuity (human transport from Preseli in South-West Wales), or through natural agency (glaciation)? Yet this controversy, fuelled by media and internet hype, is in danger of crossing the line from vigorous debate to outright quarrel as the arguments become ever more polarised, acrimonious, even personal at times. And into this arena Brian John has stepped, with the timely publicationofthefirstbookdevotedcompletelytothe subject of the Stonehenge bluestones.
The bluestone enigma is a compact volume written in accessible style, attractively presented, and illustrated with a wealth of well-chosen photographs. Long in the making (the author has been mulling the subject over for twenty years or more), it will appeal to a wide non-academic readership as well as provide an introduction to the subject for interested archaeologists. The book is remarkably up-to-date, including discussion of the BBC Timewatch television broadcast on Stonehenge (September 2008) only a month or so before publication.
The eight chapters of the book take us through the archaeology and history of the bluestones, on to the development and dissemination of the human transport theory, and thence to the scientific (largely petrological) research on bluestones, and the glaciation evidence. In the final chapter, ‘The Balance of Probabilities’, John lists the arguments on both sides – human or glacial transport – before concluding that ‘ice was responsible for at least four-fifths of the transport involved’. In allowing the possibility of an element of human transport, John keeps carefullywithintheboundsofthepresentevidencefor maximum eastward extent of UK glaciation. Overall the author gives a fair hearing to both sides of the debate. He also reminds us of the flurries of excitement (over, for example, ‘dropped’ bluestones in the River Cleddau, Chlorine 36 dating of bluestones, and recent strontium isotope analysis of human and animal teeth) that have appeared over the years in the press, often with unjustified interpretations.
All the chapters are based on wide reading of the literature, and there are unexpected elements as well as the usual (and necessary) repeat of background facts. Thus, John notes the possibility that a smaller number of bluestones were incorporated in Stonehenge than is generally assumed (perhaps some of those stone holescontainednotbluestones,butsarsens,orindeed, nothing at all). And he includes an interesting examination of Geoffrey of Monmouth’s account of bluestone origins (Merlin used ‘engines’ not magic), giving us an unusually lengthy excerpt from the twelfth-century document.
When it comes to the petrographic evidence John underlines, above all, the great variety of rock types (at least fifteen) that constitute the bluestones, and the wide geographic distribution of their sources (from the Pembrokeshire coast in the west to the Senni Beds some 70 miles east of Preseli), in an effort to lay to rest the common misconception that bluestones are all from Preseli, or are all spotted dolerites. He gives short shrift to the ‘healing bluestones’ theory expoundedonTimewatch,questioningamongstother points why, if Carn Menyn was the special outcrop, so many bluestones were taken from elsewhere.
A strength of the book is the chapter on glaciation. John’s background in glacial geomorphology (his doctoral dissertation was on glaciation of Pembrokeshire) allows him to de-mystify the complexities of the glacial evidence. Importantly, he reports new and ongoing work by Alun Hubbard at the Institute of Geography and Earth Sciences at Aberystwyth University and others of the Britice Project (http://www.sheffield.ac.uk/geography/staff/
547
Reviewclark chris/britice.html), in which some of the computer modelling of the UK Last Glacial Maximum shows ice extending well beyond the previously accepted limits (which were around the Bristol Channel and the north Devon/Cornwall coast), and reaching as far as the Marlborough and Salisbury Plain areas. John also proposes a mechanism forentrainmentofbluestoneerraticsintoaconfluence of Irish Sea and Welsh ice, a model that incidentally would suggest preferential removal of bluestones from northern Preseli flanks. Significantly, the geochemical evidence suggests bluestone origins from those very northern outcrops.
John admits the dearth of field evidence for glaciation on Salisbury Plain, a lack which leaves the peripheral edges of the computer modelling without ‘ground truthing’ (there are indications of periglacial conditions on the edge of Salisbury Plain but firm evidence of substantial ice cover cannot be said to extend further inland than Bridgewater and Bath). John gives the usual explanations for this absence of evidence (which is not, as Aubrey Burl has pointed out, the same as evidence for absence) – field clearance, bluestones in pre-Stonehenge contexts constituting erratics, incomplete field research – but he notes, in addition, telling examples of glaciated yet ‘driftless’areasofNorthAmericaandeasternEngland.
The book – sufficiently referenced but lacking an index – tries to be both popular and academic, combining an informal writing style with (simplification of) a lot of serious literature. Mainly, it works. Personally, I have only minor complaints. I would not call Stonehenge an ‘Axe Factory’ (yes, some axe-heads are geochemically identical to some monoliths, but I’d prefer to think of adventitious use of other locally-available erratics). The Boles Barrow bluestone in Salisbury Museum is discussed, but the ambiguity over its reported weight does not seem to me to have ever been satisfactorily explained. There is limited consideration of evidence for archaeological parallels to bluestone settings, but since Aubrey Burl discussed these in his suggestions of Breton links (and John makes frequent reference to Burl’s work throughout the book) this omission can be allowed. The reference to ‘Early’ (Neolithic) on page 79 when talking of prehistoric seafaring abilities seems out of place since bluestone transport is generally proposed for a later stage of the Neolithic. And I would have liked to see some mention of the ‘other’ Preseli axe type (the rhyolitic tuff axes) whose distribution from Preseli is as yet largely unknown.
Why do bluestones evoke such rancorous comments whenever glaciation is suggested? John suspects a combination of obstinate enthusiasm for an exciting story (human transport), intransigence of establishment, and vested interests. But none of these should, of course, have any bearing whatsoever on the science. Surely we are all, at heart, on the same side here – aren’t we? – working our way towards a true understanding of Stonehenge, and agreeing to disagree in a civilised manner along the way.
Will the bluestone puzzle ever be ‘solved’ one way or another? Like Brian John, I doubt if a ‘killer fact’ will ever turn up. But I do believe that advances in glaciology will gradually lead to an acceptance of glacial ice extending, at its maximum, well into the south-west of England; and in future years, the controversy may perhaps have become a matter of purely historiographical interest. As John points out, Stonehenge is quite wonderful enough without resorting to bluestones-on-rafts. The bluestone enigma makes a good case for throwing out the rafts.
OLWEN WILLIAMS-THORPE
Department of Earth Sciences,
The Open University, Milton Keynes, UK
(Email: o.williams-thorpe@open.ac.uk

DANIELE MORANDI BONACOSSI (ed.). Urban and natural landscapes of an ancient Syrian capital: settlementandenvironmentatTellMishrifeh/Qatnaand in central-western Syria (Studi Archeologici su Qatna 1). 350 pages, 172 illustrations, 31 tables & 3 colour fold-out plates. 2007. Udine: Forum; 978-88-8420418-9 paperback €70 & $105.
The mound at Mishrife, in inland western Syria´ northeast of Homs, is completely unremarkable in itself. It represents a modest	prehistoric settlement,	but	the roughly square dump rampart	fortifications around the lower city, enclosing	a	square kilometre and rising to a height of 15m, are a different matter. Add to the size of the city
the fact that it had at its centre a monumental palace complex, below which a German team has recently found a suite of royal funerary chambers. Cuneiform tablets found more than seventy years ago in the early French excavations at the site, references in
548
