Bush Barrow gold
I.A. KINNES, I.H. LONGWORTH, I.M. MCINTYRE,
S.P. NEEDHAM & W.A. ODDY*
The group of gold objects excavated in 1808 from Bush Barrow, a little to the south of Stonehenge, are among the best-known and best-regarded artefacts from British prehistory. Here they are fully published, with an account of the recent restoration of the larger lozenge from the group.

Introduction
The Bush Barrow grave-goods represent a particularly rich assemblage within the series of Wessex burials characterized by Piggott (1938) and have attracted recurrent attention in subsequent studies (Britton 1963; Gerloff 1975; Coles & Taylor 1971; Taylor 1980). Despite this perceived importance, enhanced by the presence of spectacular gold objects, no definitive study has been undertaken of individual items or the group as a whole.
  The recent restoration of the large lozenge from its flattened state to a domed profile has already incurred considerable debate and some controversy. It is hoped that publication of the detailed study of these pieces, recently undertaken by the authors, will enable this debate to be resolved through analysis of the primary observed and recorded data, which we here set out.
The burial and grave-group
Bush Barrow is a large bowl barrow in the Normanton linear group (VCH 1957: I, 96; Wilsford 5). It was trenched in 1808 by William Cunnington with the familiar assistance of paid labourers, John and Stephen Parker, financed by Sir Richard Colt Hoare. An attempt on 10 July was unproductive, but work was resumed in September and the burial discovered on or about the old surface, 'the floor of the barrow' (Hoare 1810: 202—4). 'The skeleton of a tall and stout man lying from south to north' seems to have been in an extended position, a rare departure from the normal crouched or contracted positions. The grave-goods, systematically placed on and around the body, comprised a bronze low-flanged axe (near shoulder), two daggers and a gold belt hook (near right arm), a third dagger (right hand), a stone macehead with bronze fitting, bone mounts and 'many small rings' and the small gold lozenge (at right side), the large lozenge (on chest) and 'several brass-rivets intermixed with wood and some thin bits of brass nearly decomposed' (beyond the head). A conjectural reconstruction of the burial has been offered by Ashbee (1960: 77).
  The skeleton, as usual for Cunnington and Hoare excavations, was not retrieved and presumably still rests beneath the backfill. The axe is of a type attributable to Metalwork Assemblage V (Needham et al, 1985: iii) coeval with Wessex 1. The two large daggers are attributed by Gerloff (1975: nos. 113 & 124) to ArmoricoBritish A and B types respectively. Both retain traces of composite wood and leather sheaths. The former had a wooden hilt inlaid with minute gold pins in an elaborate geometric pattern.
 LA. Kinnes, I.H. Longworth & S.P. Needham, Department of Prehistoric and Romano-British Antiquities, British Museum, Great Russell Street, London WCIB 3DG. I-M. McIntyre & W.A. Oddy, Department of Conservation, British Museum, Great Russe)) Street, London WC'IB    
ANTIQUITY 62 (1988): 24—39  Some of the finds do not survive and were, perhaps, not retrieved. The third dagger was i so much corroded that it broke to pieces on moving'. The gold pins on the dagger hilt were 'so very minute. that our labourers had thrown out thousands of them with their shovels and scattered them in every direction'. The
bronze fitting for the macehead and the 'many small rings' of bone do not survive and the deposit of wood and metal, surmised as 'the mouldered remains of a shield', is now represented by 34 rivets and a hooked section of rod (Annable & Simpson 1964: nos. 168—78).
History of the collections
The material recovered by Cunnington was arranged and displayed in the Moss House in the garden of his Heytesbury home. The description provided by his daughter Elizabeth is of a rustic timber structure appropriate to the Romantic Age (quoted in Cunnington 1975: 37—8), and Fenton (1811: 251) observed: 'Nothing could be more curious and systematic than the arrangement of the museum: the contents of every tumulus were separate. , After Cunnington's death in 1810, his family undertook prolonged and sometimes bitter negotiations as to the future of the antiquities, the geological material having been briskly sold off, and the matter was not settled until the objects were transferred to Stourhead in 1818 on payment of E200 by Colt Hoare. The collection was well cared for until the latter's death in 1838, but there followed a period of neglect ended by its loan to Devizes Museum in 1878, a transfer which met with certain opposition. A local newspaper remarked: 'To rescue a "Collection" of what as it lies in the cellar at Stourhead appears to unarchaeological eyes more like the refuse of a marine store shop than anything else, argues a degree of antiquarian excentricity which few persons will be able to appreciate' (quoted by Cunnington 1975: 92). The material was subsequently purchased by the Wiltshire Archaeological Society in 1883 for E250 and has remained the centrepiece of its collections since, with catalogues issued in 1896 and 1964. Anxiety over the security of the gold objects led to them being placed on loan to the British Museum in 1922, where, with the exception of the war years, they were continuously on display until their return to Devizes in 1985.
  The potential for loss and incidental damage throughout much of this history since discovery is manifest. The Bush Barrow finds have never been described in detail and the goldwork, in particular, has been illustrated only in schematic style with the partial exception of the commissioned drawings by Waterhouse (Craw-
25
ford & Keiller 1928: 191—2). The photographic record spans only more recent history and largely consists of overall views rather than specific detail.
The large lozenge (FIGURES 1 & 2, PLATES 1, 2
The object, 185.5 mm long and 157 mm wide, is made of sheet gold, between 0.1 and 0.2 mm thick where measurable around the edges. The edges are in fact folded back round three angles in section, the final very short return evidently having been designed to grip a groove or recess in the back of the original support. The sides created by these folds are moulded with a single longitudinal groove and, where intact, are between 3.4 and 4.0 mm broad. The craftsman attempted to obscure the lapping created on the sides of the corners by further working, but this appears to have been a little clumsy so that minor crimps still show in the metal; these are not thought to be wholly the product of subsequent damage in or out of the ground. The laps on the rear fold of the rim have, however, been left unworked.
  The finish of the corners is far inferior to the face design which was very carefully executed. Four decorative bands, each of four grooves, form concentric lozenges. The innermost and outermost registers thus defined are filled respectively with a simple lattice and a zig-zag design. The main border grooves have an average width of about 0.7 mm, but in general grade from slightly broader at the perimeter to slightly narrower near the centre. All of the hatching is finer with an average groove width of 0.4—0.5 mm. The grooves have neat V profiles with rounded bottoms and, as they show no sign of individual tracer marks, it is considered most likely that they were drawn in the surface using an appropriately shaped and polished point. Experimentation with this technique on sheet metal of comparable thickness and ductility has shown that the clean and uniform grooves of the Bush Barrow decoration can be faithfully reproduced. Although the decoration comprises a simple geometric design, it is very neatly laid out. It would appear however that previous researchers have taken the border sets of grooves to be absolutely straight. In actual fact in its unrestored state the outer two groove sets
 The plates are printed as page 32—6.
LA. 

FIGURE I. The large lozenge.
described a gentle bow which could easily be overlooked (luring casual inspection. It seems unlikely that an almost imperceptible curve should have been a conscious part of the design to gain aesthetic effect. On the other hand, given the precision with which the decoration is laid out and the consistent outwards direction of bowing, it is hard to credit the idea that this vvas a systematic but unintended error by our presumed highly skilled artisan, It seems more likely that the bowed lines were [he incidental result of changes to the geometry of the object since manufacture, and we elaborate on this hypothesis below.
  The face of the large lozenge has been in an altered state since the earliest photographic records (early drawings being too schematic for comparison), presumably owing to damage in the ground and/or prior to its transfer to Devizes Museum in 1878. In its unrestored state undulations covered the whole face (e.g. PLATE 1; Clarke et al. 1985: 109 & plate 4.30 seen under harsh oblique lighting) thus implying the presence of slack metal not taken up by the flat plane. The edges, as comparatively rigid structures, appeared to be under some tension and this constraint was generally causing the sheet to hollow just inside. It is probable that the perceived tension in the sides, in conjunction with external pressures, led to the small tears which cross each side at one or more points.
  Under a hand lens the face displays a mass of very fine striations (which remain unaltered on the restored piece), often crossing on different axes. For the greatest part of the surface the striations have a prevailing alignment on the longer axis of the lozenge, whereas parts of the outer zone have an emphasis on edge-parallel marks. The origin and indeed antiquity of these striations is not easily assessed, but presumably they equate with the longitudinal 'burnish' noted by Taylor (1980: 46). The two rather ragged perforations, lying one at each axial apex, were present at the time of excavation (Hoare 1810: 204), and presumably represent some form of attachment. The surface is blemished at various points by minor scratches, creases and indentations.
Conservation
Faced with the surface characteristics described above and with a likely continuing demand for the object to travel on loan exhibitions and to be further handled for the purposes of study, a more stable form and a new modern backing were thought to be beneficial to its long-term curation. A minimal conservation was therefore undertaken in 1985 which has removed the major undulations of the face, but left unaltered a multitude of minor undulations and variable distortion of the turned border at intervals. A perspex mount had been madc in 1977 to prevent flexing of the object when handled, but it was felt that this gave insufficient protection and it was decided that the best interests of the survival of the object would be in restoring the original shape and making a more supportive mount.
  The undulations, in our opinion, are to be understood as resulting from the compression of a surface area a little larger than the lozenge frame allows into a flat plane. In other words a curved or angled surface in positive or negative relief had been dented and flattened. Since there is no indication whatsoever of any former angles or bevels in the sheet metal (we believe that slight creases would certainly have survived) it is logical to deduce a curved surface, which would, furthermore, have been convex to make most sense of the edge grips.
  The wrinkles were removed by the use of gentle localized pressure, tapping and burnishing whilst supporting the gold with a piece of leather. Pressure was applied with the fingers or with hand-held wood, perspex and leather tools which were individually shaped and applied in such a way as to avoid any contact with the incised decoration. The use of specially made tools allowed the correct placing of the pressure necessary to eliminate the wrinkles without stretching the gold. Burnishing was carried out with steel tools applied through carefully placed leather pads to avoid any risk of scratching the gold. These processes were only applied to the major dents and creases, and no attempt was made to smooth the whole surface by removing minor blemishes. The end result of these local treatments was the even shallow dome which the gold lozenge has now assumed with very slight chines at the end of the axes. The even symmetrical shape shows that the metal has not been stretched as a result of uneven pressures in the ground; indeed it seems extremely unlikely that the curved profiles are due to postdepositional damage.
28	1.As 
.c

•D
d	h
cD
h
2
FIGURE 2. The large lozenge; key to dimensions measured and principles of geometry.  Once the main shape had been restored, attention was turned to a number, 149, which had stretched the gold when it was written on the back of the object, before 1922 (PLATE 1). The number refers to the Stourhead catalogue (Devizes Museum 1896: 38—9). Because of this, the marks could not be removed using soft tools as before but were eliminated by the use of a metal tool applied directly to the surface. This tool, a highly polished convex hammer, was specially made for the job to avoid any risk of leaving planishing marks on the gold. It is possible that very slight and strictly localized stretching has taken place in the vicinity of the number. The lozenge was finally cleaned with Goddards Long Term Silver Foam diluted with water and the addition of a little detergent. The purpose of this was to remove finger marks and surface dirt; it was not used vigorously as a polish. Support for the re-shaped object was provided by making a polished perspex insert for the existing mount which closely followed the contours of the object without actually touching it. The mount has been carefully designed to ensure that no further strain is imposed upon the gold.
Analysis of metrical data
In addition to causing buckling, it can be predicted that crushing the dome would have tended to force the edges out. To a large extent this would have been resisted by the comparative rigidity of the lozenge frame of box section, while the tautness along the straight edges would oppose any linear stretch. However, there would also have been a secondary effect of compression, a tendency to bow the sides, which derives from the three-dimensional geometry of a domed lozenge. in order to maintain a flat base around the perimeter of the lozenge (for we assume a flat back of the original support), it will be found that the slope of the dome down to the middle of any straight side (FIGURE 2a, AB; FIGURE 2b) will be steeper than that to any apex, owing to the shorter horizontal distance (111) travelled for the same depth of relief (d). The steeper slope therefore gives a disproportionately larger over-surface dimension relative to its respective horizontal chord distance (111). In this way Sl/hl is greater than sJh2.
  The two outermost bands of grooves were in fact found to have described very gentle curves prior to restoration; they consistently bowed outwards as our model has predicted. The inner two bands were effectively straight. Careful measurements have been taken on the restored object to quantify the differences between horizontal chord and over-surface dimensions.
29These made use of the precisely executed decoration rather than the actual edges of the object which, given the vagaries of distortion and angularity, would permit only imprecise measurement. Although dimensions have been measured to an accuracy of 0.1 mm, it should be understood that only consistent trends based on multiple measurements are taken to be meaningful. For ease of reference the groove bands have been numbered 1—4 from the outside inwards (FIGURE 2a). Six measurements were taken on each of the groove bands, three perpendicular to either pair of parallel sides (FIGURE 2d).
  The results are tabulated in TABLE 1. Measurements were taken consistently to the centre of the outermost groove of each band using plastic vernier calipers.
  In its restored state the lozenge is found to show a positive deviation A (TABLE 1) between over-surface and chord measurements which increases towards the outermost grooves. This is to be entirely expected from the geometry of a dome. There is however a more important deviation between the medial (b, e) and lateral (a, c, d, f) over-surface measurements taken across a given groove-enclosed zone (FIGURE 2d). These show (TABLE 1) that a greater distance is traversed across the medial dimensions (b, e) than across the complementary lateral ones (a, c, d, f) in the case of groove bands 1 and 2. This again could only result from a domed profile assuming that these grooves were laid on effectively straight lines as seen in plan view. Certainly they have been brought to linearity by the removal of slack metal in the course of restoration. Some idea of the precision with which the Bronze Age craftsman could lay out straight lines by eye can be gained from the average chord dimensions (TABLE 1). The medial and lateral averages are never identical, but differ by values of less than 0.5% in both positive and negative senses, These small discrepancies may represent a mixture of slight errors arising from measurement, from original execution, and from closeness of the restored profiles to original form.
  The metrical data can be used to make two further points. First, the minimal change in the A values for bands 3 and 4 support the idea that the dome was fairly flat in the centre. Secondly, the discrepancy between the medial and lateral over-surface dimensions of band 1, close to the
Groove	lateral	medial set	dimensions	dimensions
(mm)	(mm)  c d  b e
1 116.3 116.6 116.0 116.3 117.4 116.3 s	116.5 117.2 116.2 116.6 118.3 117.6
2 86.6 87.0 86.6 86.5 87.3 86.7
	s	86.8 87.3 86.6 86.6 87.0 87.8
3 h	57.0 57.4 56.7 57.0 57.0 56.6 s	56.6 57.5 56.6 57.1 57.3 56.7
4 27,3 27.2 27.5 27.5 27.1 27.4 s  not measured 
a Lateral and medial measurements taken perpendicularly across each groove set as horizontal chords (h) and over-surface (s) dimensions. Measurements are consistently taken between the centre of the outermost groove of each set. Over-surface measurements were achieved by marking flexible strips of card laid across the surface.
average	average lateral 	medial	between dimensions dimensions averages (mm)	(mm)	(mm)
1 h	116.3	116.85	+0.55	+0.47
	116.62	117.95	

	0.32	1.1

2 h 86.67 87.0 +0.33 +0.38 s 86.82 87,4 +0.58 +0.66
	0.15	0.4

3 h 57.02 56.8 s 56.95 57.0 +0.05 
	-0.07	0.2
	27.37	27.25	s	
Positive A values indicate general convexity of lines, negative values indicate concave tendance.
b Average lateral and medial measurements calculated from a and the absolute (A) and percentage ( ,/0) differences between them.
TABLE 1. Metrical data for the large lozenge.
edge, can be used to calculate a theoretical bow offset of0.8 mm per side on flattening. This is in reasonable accord with bow offsets of between 0.5 and 1.0 mm measured from two record photographs of the unrestored object.
The small lozenge (FIGURES 3 & 4, PLATE 3)
The smaller lozenge is 31,7 mm long and 19.5 mm wide. Since 1977 it has been mounted
30	I.A. 



FIGURE 3. The small lozenge.
securely on a perspex backing making it difficult to gauge the thickness of the sheet. The edges are folded back through two angles, the rear fold being a small lip and the side wall having a corrugated section with a single central furrow similar to those on the large lozenge. The sides have a maximum breadth of 1.8 mm. The corners are lapped, a neat tapered lap surviving clearly at one apex.
  The face is essentially flat although with some undulations. Before conservation work in 1977 the face was more crumpled and the sides rather ragged owing to tears and distortion. There are two major creases across the face. One positive crease, somewhat irregular, follows the long axis and becomes a negative crease only close to the bottom apex. This feature is not particularly neat and therefore not easily understood as an original moulding, but as it does not seem to distort the groove junction it passes through, it may be an original feature. It is depicted in Crocker's engraving (Hoare 1810: plate xxvii.5). A transverse crease across the upper part of the lozenge is more certainly damage and runs into a tear at each side. It is not clear when this damage occurred.
  There is evidence that the face was not completely flat. At intervals around the edges an extremely light beading survives. In tandem with this the zone immediately inside is generally slightly hollowed. These features were present before the 1977 conservation which only straightened the more obvious buckling of damage. A small amount of slack metal in the centre of the lozenge might further suggest that it was very slightly raised, perhaps even making
a
b
FIGURE 4. The small lozenge. a Suggested reconstruction.
b The effects of subsequent compression on its cross-section.
use ofthe longitudinal crease as a spine (FIGURE 4a). If this was the case, and it can only remain a tentative hypothesis, subsequent flattening of the face could well have created hollowing just inside the more rigid frame (FIGURE 4b).
  The decoration on the small lozenge is not as neatly executed as that on the large lozenge. The three concentric lozenge grooves are laid out a
  little asymmetrically and the width of the grooves is more variable with an average of 0.5 mm. In a few cases grooves run on a short distance beyond an angular junction. The grooves nevertheless retain a crisp V section with rounded bottom, their crispness showing particularly well from the rear. As with the large lozenge, there is no sign of individual tracer marks in the grooves. The whole of the face carries extremely light striations which are consistently longitudinally aligned.
The belt hook cover (FIGURES 5 & 6, PLATES 4

The belt hook cover comprises two separate components of gold sheet. The body or backplate is a curved-sided quadrilateral, symmetrical about one axis, with distinctly convex
      cm FIGURE 5. The belt hook cover.
sides and concave ends. The top end (as drawn) is narrower (58 mm) than the bottom (71 mm), the left side measures 78 mm and the right side 77.5 mm. The edges have been folded around two angles to form a box section with flat sides and corrugated rear returns presumably designed to grip recesses in the back of an organic mount. Four fine perforations through the corners of the rear flange, and another close to one of them, presumably held pins which helped secure the sheet gold cover to its mount. The folding to form the corners is not particularly neat, and little if any attempt had been made to hammer them together or grind out the steps.
  Attention has not before been drawn to the sides and ends which are distinguished by cigar-like shapes (cf. Crawford & Keiller 1928: 191, figure 45d; Annable & Simpson 1964: 99, figure 176; Gerloff 1975: plate 45, B. 11; Piggott 1973: 367, figure 21 A9). The side walls are

gently and asymmetrically convex at the front and straight (right) or slightly concave (left) at the back. The breadth of these right and left sides is respectively 3.3 mm and 3.8 mm at the bottom, 4.7 mm and 4.3 mm at the maximum just above the middle and 4.0 mm and 4.6 mm at the top. The end walls are both bi-convex, the front bearing the stronger curve. The top end swells from 4.0 mm and 4.6 mm at the corners to 5.7 mm in the middle, the bottom end from 3.3. mm and 3.8 mm at the corners to 4.3 mm in the middle. The net result of the side and end profiles is to produce a natural gentle dome in the face. In its present condition the middle of the face is slightly dished and gives the impression that the centre of the dome has been pushed in. The sheet metal is between 0.1 mm and 0.2 mm thick, and has many gentle undulations.
  As with the large lozenge, four concentric bands of grooves, this time each being a set of
32	I.A. 
PLATE 1. The large lozenge prior to restoration; the small lozenge alongside.


PLATE 2. The large lozenge restored, a Face. b ProJile.


PLATE 3.
a The large lozenge: oblique detail of upper apex.
b The smoll lozenge: pre-1977 conservation.	c The small lozenge: post-1977 conservation.

PLATE 4. The belt hook cover. a Face view.
b Top end.	
c Oblique view.	
PLATE 5. The belt hook cover. a Rear of the hook component.
b Dismantled to show the closed aperture flap.


three, decorate the face. Band 1 at the perimeter closely follows the edge curves, but the bands become progressively straighter towards the central band 4 which describes a trapezoid. The top of this band is absent because of the hook aperture, while band 3 straddles the hook and abutts the top of band 2. The grooves are continuous, smooth and even; again they have a round-bottomed V section.
  The surface carries masses of light striations on both longitudinal and transverse axes, often superimposed. The bottom three horizontal registers have prevailing transverse striations, while these are exclusive on the top horizontal register. Axial marks prevail on the rest of the body and indeed are alone on the central register.
  The aperture for the hook is trapezoid and has simple edges, strengthened only by folding to form a tiny lip. The aperture was at first cut larger, and part of the interior left attached to the bottom edge as a flap. This flap is defined by two discernible cracks leading from the corners of the aperture and by a crease along its bottom. One of the cracks has been virtually hammered out from the front in order to forge a join and this has blurred the decorative grooves which impinge on it. With the flap turned out the aperture would have closely matched the full base of the hook. However for some reason, probably during initial manufacture, it was decided to modify the coupling of the two components. The flap was closed up and the lap flanges on the hook confined to the parts of its base which correspond with three sides of the reduced aperture. The two side flanges are flat, while the top flange has a corrugated profile. This coupling arrangement means that the simple edge around the rest of the opening to the hook butts up against the flap which is now continuous with the face of the back-plate. It is hard to see any functional advantage to the modified coupling. For the object to be in the least bit functional, a solid and well-fitting core would have been required. In such circumstances the object would derive its strength entirely from the core so that the details of joining the sheet cover components becolne of limited structural importance and merely cosmetic,
  Something of the formation and assembly of the two components may be deduced. It seems likely that the decoration would have been

FIGURE 6. The belt-hook cover: suggested original two-piece mount for the cover.
formed, along with the structural folds, on well carved cores which remained as the permanent support in use. If the decoration had been executed first against, say, a wax or resin backing it might have been difficult to retain it in pristine condition during fold construction. A wax/resin float might more logically have coated a more solid support to facilitate decoration, then to have been left in situ. A plug would be needed firmly to link the two components and, given the flanges around its base, this is likely to have projected and expanded from the hook (FIGURE 6). A complementary socket would have been cut in the back-plate support prior to fitting its gold cover. A step in the plug/socket profile would accommodate the flap of gold sheet which on assembly was to become trapped between the two cores. A tight fit, application of glue, or the fixing of a rear plate across both cores would have secured the plug/socket junction.
  The hook itself has a gracefully tapered tongue ending in a squared, but slightly concave end, 13.5 mm wide. In profile this end is totally blunt, but is corrugated by five grooves which then extend back on either side in a curve outlining the outer profile. Additional parallel grooves at the base swell the total number to nine and eleven respectively on the left and
38
right sides. The hollow tongue of the hook is basically rectangular in section, but a slight sinuosity of the rear face betrays the existence of two diffuse step mouldings (FIGURE 5, PLATE 5a). The central depression in the rear face may be Taylor's pressure line, which she attributed to wear (1980: 46). However, the steps appear to be well-hammered lap joints at the junction of sides and rear. Similarly, small laps may be identified along the short continuations of the inside angles as they approach the back-plate. A row of small hammer indentations runs along the tongue end of the reverse and a small slit perforates the underside further back, possibly owing to over-thinning of the metal. There are a few longitudinal scratches on the rear face which have rough profiles and very slightly waver from a straight course. It seems likely that they are ancient, being for example use damage from the loop passing through the orifice in another fitting. The adjacent corners of the hook show possible rounding from wear. The whole of the rear face is also marred by coarse transverse scoremarks which are hidden from view on the assembled artefact. These may indicate rough finishing rather than subsequent damage. Similar scoremarks cut diagonally across the sides of the hook, interrupted by the decorative grooves (FIGURE 5). The front face, on the other hand, bears only extremely light striations, which are transverse on the bevelled top and longitudinal on the long tongue. Two further axial scratches on the top are probably of modern origin.
Discussion
As a result of our detailed study it is possible to argue that the Bush Barrow gold pieces are not the simple planiforms that have always been assumed. The back-plate of the hook was indisputably manufactured as a gentle dome and we have presented compelling reasons for believing the large lozenge to have had a similar profile. Here the decision by the Bronze Age goldsmith to give the sides parallel rather than lenticular edges in profile has meant that the former geometry of the crushed object was not obvious on superficial examination. However, the differentially distributed stress caused by conflict between a straight-edged frame and a curved profile has led to tell-tale signs in the distorted, pre-restoration form. Even the small lozenge shows evidence for a shaped face. The most positive feature is the slight edge beading, but there is also the possibility of the face having a slightly convex profile with a longitudinal bevel.
  It is possible therefore that all three of the Bush Barrow sheet gold covers were gently domed, and this may give some new insight into their background. Both the lozenge and the belt hook are rare forms. The lozenge cover is only matched at Clandon, Dorset, by a specimen which may repay the same detailed examination (Clarke et al. 1985: 122, plate 4.54). Their previously assumed flat geometry has tended to place them in a class of their own, but it is now possible to suggest that they belong to a family of domed buttons, albeit in an aggrandized form. Elaboration of the standard small conical button of the late Beaker assemblages is seen most obviously in Wessex 1 contexts in the deep gold-covered cones of Wilsford G8 and Upton Lovell G2 (e) (Annable & Simpson 1964: nos. 181 & 233). It seems to us that the shallowdomed lozenge represents a derivation along an entirely different path, but still serves the same purposes of maximizing the ostentatious effect of costume fittings.
  Belt hooks of the kind that would have supported the Bush Barrow cover are known in bone from Killicarney (Co. Cavan), Brackmont (Fife) and 'Wiltshire' (Simpson 1968: 202—3), while several others lack broad back-plates. Assuming that the Bush Barrow specimen was made functional by means of a rigid support and we believe it likely that it actually found use— then it must have been a single object once assembled, as reasserted by Sirnpson (1968: 203). This is not a problem since a thin loop of leather, bone or bronze attached to an opposing belt end or some other fitting would obscure rather little of the decorated back-plate, contrary to Thomas's reservations (1966: b).
  Classic objects such as the Wessex gold have always attracted and will continue to attract attention from scholars of prehistory. Furthermore, there has been a recent demand for them to appear in major international exhibitions. Continued handling and transportation pose problems for the long-term curation of flimsy sheet gold items. In the case of the large lozenge, restoration as close as possible to the deduced original form was seen to be the most effective way of re-creating a certain limited rigidity in the sheet itself, and, more importantly, of allowing a closely fitting support to be made. In addition to the greater protection offered against wear and tear, the process of restoration has forced a critical reappraisal of the technology, form and affinities of certain sheet gold forms in the Wessex 1 range.
References
ANNABLE, F.K. & D.D.A. SIMPS()N. 1964. Guide catalogue of the neolithic and bronze age collections in Devizes Museum. Devizes: Wiltshire Archaeological and Natural History Society.
ASHBEE, P. 1960. The bronze age round barrow in Britain. London: Phoenix House.
BRI'I"I'ON, D. 1963. Traditions of metalworking in the later Neolithic and early Bronze Age of Britain, Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society 29: 258—325.
CLARKE, D.v., T.G. COWIE & A. FOXON. 1985. Symbols of power at the time of Stonehenge. Edinburgh: HMSO. CRAWFORD, O.G.S. & A. KEILLER. 1928. Wessex from the air. Oxford: Clarendon.
COLES, J.M. & J. TAYLOR. 1971. The Wessex Culture: a minimal view, Antiquity 45: 6—14.
 R.H. 1975. Fronl antiquary to archaeologist. Aylesbury: Shire.
DEV17,ES MUSEIJM. 1896. Catalogue of antiquities in the museum of the Wiltshire Archaeological and Natural History Society at Devizes; part 1: The Stourhead collection (ed. W. Cunnington & EH. Goddard). I)evizes: Wiltshire Archaeological and Natural History Society.
R. 1 UI I. A tour in quest of genealogy. London. 39
Acknowledgements. The drawings and recent photographs (PLATES 2, 3c 4a—b), critical to this assessment, were undertaken by Philip Dean and Dave Webb; publication of the colour plates here was made possible through a generous grant from the David Thomson Trust; for advice and information we are grateful to Dr D. Clarke; Dr P. Robinson provided study facilities and assistance in Devizes Museum.
GERLOFF, S. 1975. The early bronze age daggers in Great Britain. Munich: C.H. Beck. Prähistorische Bronzefunde VI, 2..
HOARE, R. COLT. 1810. rl'he ancient history of south Wiltshire. London: William Miller.
NEEDHAM, S.P., A.J. LAWSON & M.S. GREEN. 1985 Early bronze age hoards. London: British Museum. British bronze age metalwork, associated finds series A 1—6.
S. 1938. rl'he Early Bronze Age in Wessex, Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society 4: 52—106.
1973 The Wessex Culture of the Early Bronze Age, in
R.B. Pugh (ed), Victoria County History of Wiltshire 1, part 2: 352—75. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
SIMPSON, D.D.A. 1968. Food Vessels: associations and chronology, in J.M. Coles & D.D.A. Simpson (ed.), Studies in ancient Europe: 197—211. Leicester: Leicester University Press.
TAYLOR, J.J, 1980. Bronze age goldwork of the British Isles. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
TH()MAS, N. 1966. Notes on some early bronze age objects in Devizes Museum, Wiltshire Archaeological Magazine. 61: 1—8.
VCH 1957 Victoria County Flistory of Wiltshire 1, part 1. Oxford: Clarendon.

Book Chronicle
continued from p. 23
Bruce Jackson. Fieldwork. xiii + 311 pages. 1987. Champaign (IL): University of Illinois Press; ISBN 0-252-01370-0 hardback $37.95; ISBN 0-252-013372-7 paperback $13.95.
Wayne T. Pitard. Ancient Damascus. a historical study of the Syrian city-state from earliest times until its fall to the Assyrians in 732 BCE.ix + '2'3(), 7 figures. 1987. Winona Lake (IN): Eissenbrauns; ISBN 0-931464-29-3 hardback $20.00. H.A.G Brijder, A.A. Drukker & C.W. Neeft (ed.). Enthousiasmos: essays on Greek and related pottery presented to J.M. Hemelrijk. 220 pages, many illustrations. 1986. Amsterdam. Allard Pierson Series vol. 6; ISBN 90-71211-08-8 hardback.
Jonathan Haas, Shelia Pozorski & Thomas Pozorski. The origins and development of the Andean state. 188 pages, many figures. 1987. Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press; ISBN 0-521-33102-1 hardback E30.OO & $42.50.
Martin Millett & David Graham. Excavations on the Romano-British small town at Neatham, Hampshire 1969—1979. xvi + 166 pages, 104 figures, 33 tables, 1 microfiche. 1986. Gloucester: Alan Sutton for the Hampshire Field Club and Farnham & District Museum Society; ISBN 0-907473-01-6 paperback E'20.00.
Malcolm Todd. The northern barbarians 100 BC—AD 300. x + 212 pages, 5 plates,40 figures.
1987. Oxford & New York: Basil Blackwell; ISBN 0-613-15159-1 hardback E25.OO; ISBN 0-631-155161-3 paperback E8.50.
continued on p, 87
BUSH BARROW GOLD

KINNES et al.



BUSH BARROW GOLD

LA. KINNES et al.

LA. KINNES et al.

