REVIEWS

which are immediately convincing while others are too hypothetical to be more than plausible. His generalizations seem to me reliable in the main, especially when they are original; I disagree on a number of issues while admitting his views are tenable, but I am convinced that deference to current theory misled him where he claims a primarily military function for posterns built before the full development of siegecraft. I hold that, as a rule, these merely provided short-cuts for peacetime employments, in contrast to the later usage (from the third century onwards), when there was a recognized need for posterns through which the defenders could make sorties to destroy enemy siege-engines.
  The format, with an abnormally wide margin to contain illustrations, allows them all to stand in context, but the process used has entailed loss of clarity in photographs. A. w. LAWRENCE

C. A. Newham: The astronomical significance of Stonehenge. Leeds: John Blackburn, 1972. 32 pp., 7 figs. Copies obtainable from the publisher, Old Run Road, Leeds LS10 2AA. UK: 30p; USA: $1.50 (both post free); Stonehenge bookshop: 25P.
The author of this pamphlet is an engineer who has devoted much of his retirement to the active and fruitful study of the metrical and astronomical properties of Stonehenge. He was the first to point out (in his pamphlet The Enigma of Stonehenge, privately published at Sedge Rise, Tadcaster, Yorkshire, in 1964) that the sides of the Station Stone rectangle mark extreme directions of the risings and settings of the sun and moon, and that the latitude of Stonehenge could have been chosen deliberately to achieve a rectangular figure for these alignments. He has also published (Nature, 211, 1966, 456—8) a most interesting interpretation of the array of post-holes found by Colonel Hawley on the entrance causeway; and in the Supplement to his Enigma (Leeds: John Blackburn, 1970) he has described the possible astronomical function of the three large post-holes found during the extension of the Stonehenge car-park in 1966 and now marked on the tarmac by circles of cement.
  The present pamphlet is a summary of these and other observations, intended for the layman and the ordinary visitor to Stonehenge, where it is on sale at the bookstall. The style of presentation is perhaps a little too condensed to make easy reading for the novice ; and in due course the data on alignments will have to be revised to take account of the corrected radiocarbon dates for the main phases of construction. Meanwhile, however, this and the other works cited above form a very useful addition to the non-lunatic literature of Stonehenge, and merit a recognition which the author's modesty has hitherto denied them. R. J. C. ATKINSON
R. M. Cook: Greek painted pottery (2nd ed.). London: Methuen, 1972. 414 pp., 56 pls., 44 figs. Æ10.oo.
There are so few textbooks in Classical archaeology (let alone in any other archaeology) which can be recommended unreservedly to students, that a new edition, after ten years, of one for which this claim might be made is particularly welcome.
  Its merits are what they have always been. It is impossible to think of a single aspect of the subject which warrants at least mention and has not been accorded it, from how to handle the vases to how they have been studied by scholars in the past. There is all the necessary apparatus, with indexes to museums, glossary and a valuable critical bibliography, the omissions in which can generally, with second thought, be excused or understood. Most of the revision falls in the first half of the book, reflecting the more positive progress which has been made in Archaic studies in recent years. This is revealed particularly in the Geometric section, which draws on Coldstream's work without being bound by it. In the Orientalizing there is a useful closer definition of the development of the Wild Goat style, and the parts on Chiot (though Nikesermos goes unnamed) and Situlae improved. Thasos is rightly taken separately (the immigrant painters there are a phenomenon worth more attention perhaps). Naxos deserves a place on its own for its seventhcentury figure style. Scholars are bound to find points of emphasis or detail on which to disagree.
  Attic black and red figure do not attract quite the same degree of detail within the book and remain diffcult for a student to grasp, although so numerous and so well organized in terms of painters and workshops. These sections are barely revised but more has been done with South Italian, with Trendall's new books available. The subject matter of the scenes on the vases is inevitably given short shrift, but this is still a pity since it is often the iconography which first attracts and then holds a student's attention, and

333
