942
an expedition conducted by APPLEBY in July of this year to locate the Hall itself. As the prologue says, 'The wait is nearly over . . . If the records contained within the Hall of Records prove to be what the myths and legends claim, then we shall know where we originate from, our true past history, who the gods of antiquity really were and where we are heading .
Only time will tell.' Move over Olduvai Gorge. Fortunately there is a website homepage for Operation Hermes at http://www.Inter.com/Hermes for us to see how the project has got on. I tried checking up on 13 October, but the page is now down.
  RICHARD RUDGLEY's Lost civilisations of the Stone Age (xi+308 pages. 28 plates, b/w figures. 1998. London: Century; 0-7126-7785-5 hardback El 7.99) sets out to prove that the primitive societies of the Stone Age were not what they' are claimed to be. Cranial surgery, mining, pyrotechnics, sophisticated technology and art, fossil hunting, a belief in an afterlife and writing all can trace their roots back to the Stone Ages; Palaeolithic, Mesolithic and Neolithic. Nicely written, it says what many Stone Age archaeologists have been trying to convey for years.
CD-ROMs
Sudan: ancient kingdoms of the Nile (SINDIBAD MULTIMEDIA LTD, INSTITUT DU MONDE ARABE & EDITIONS FLAMMARION. IBM-PC compatible 486 or Pentium, 12Mb RAM, Windows 95/NT, 256 colours,
sound card or Apple N'lacintosh compatible 68040 or PowerPC 8Mb RAM, system 7.0 or later, 256 colours. 4xCD-ROM drive. 1997) accompanies an exhibition of the same name currently under way in Egypt. It is a sort of interactive guidebook in which we are offered the chance to take a Voyage in Time, or visit the Kingdoms of the Nile. In each case 'Ancient Egyptian' music whisks us off to a choice of archaeology from the Neolithic to the final Kingdom of Meroe, visiting sites now mostly covered by Lake Nasser. Each text panel is illustrated by a number of photographs of artefacts from the exhibition, each of which reveals its vital statistics when covered by the cursor. A glossary provides information on the most difficult terms, and a slide-show allows viewers to download pictures of artefacts to disc in a variety of formats, Quite clever, but the music gets on your nerves very quickly. Fortunately it can be turned off.
Also

Review articles
Chalk and cheese at Stonehenge
MIKE PARKER PEARSON*ALICE BECK KEHOE. Humans: an introduction to fourfield anthropology. xi+244 pages, numerous plates & illustrations. 1998. London: Routledge; 0-41591985-1 paperback El 2.99. An introductory textbook to anthropology in the American sense, with chapters on primates and human evolution, prehistoric archaeology and analysing modern societies in terms of (i) cultural ecology, (ii) economics, (iii) social regulation and (iv) religion.
  
BARRY CUNLIFFE & COLIN RENFREW (ed.). Science and Stonehenge. (Proceedings of the British Academy 92.) xiii+362 pages, 122 illustrations, 19 tables, 5 colour plates. 1997. Oxford: Oxford University Press; 0-1972-6174-4 hardback E29.95.
BARBARA BENDER. Stonehenge: making space. xiv+254 pages, 52 figures, 31 cartoons. 1998. Oxford: Berg; 1-85973-903-2 hardback E39.99; 1-85973-908-3 paperback E14.99.
* Department of Archaeology & Prehistory, University of Sheffield, Sheffield SIO 2TN, England. ANTIQUITY 72 (1998): 942-4Here are two books, ostensibly on the same subject, which encapsulate the two extremes of writing archaeology. One is the epitome of archaeology as high culture, the solid, beautifully bound book edited by the Oxbridge professors, produced from papers given at a conference at the Royal Society and published with colour plates and inserts by Oxford University Press for the British Academy. Not only is 'science' in the title, but the editorship reflects professional standing regardless of specialization. The other book is a paperback with cartoons, transcripts of taped discussions, a photograph of one archaeologist with his babies and an irreverent approach to the 'masculinist hegemony' of control over landscape, people and thought that the other book embodies. It is a book for reading anywhere and for scribbling in (it even has a page to write notes and comments), whereas the other seems to be one for the bookshelf; it impresses with its solidity and inaccessibility.
  Any student of material culture will be fascinated by the juxtaposition of these two books as discourses of power. One book is an edifice of expert knowledge and scientific objectivity whose legitimacy rests on the status of the editors and contributors, the standard academic prose style and the sense that this is a definitive statement of matters of fact, rigorously scrutinized, about the past. The other aims to undermine such exclusive discourses and stresses the contingency of knowledge, its inextricable relationship with politics and power, the politics of the past in the present and the contestation and conflict that Stonehenge engenders. It transcribes the voices not just of academics, but of free festivallers involved with the Stonehenge Campaign Group. Here in a nutshell is the contrast in archaeologists' perspectives of what the subject is about. Seen from one side it is the contrast between the scholarly and responsible reporting of evidence, results and theories versus the trendy radicalism of academic theorists whose championing of an undesirable minority is irredeemably compromised by the hypocrisy inherent in their own membership of the establishment. From the other side, it is the contrast between the naive empiricists, building an unassailable fortress of élitism and inaccessibility, science as ideology, unwilling to admit that their work is embroiled in the politics of the present and clinging onto the trappings of establishment high culture, versus the enlightened free-thinking of those who have shed their pretensions about knowledge/power, recognize archaeology as social practice in the present and want to use archaeology to make a fairer, more just and more imaginative world of possibilities, and to open up the closed down field of discourse that mimics Stonehenge's current situation.
  We might be mistaken for thinking that this is a clash between establishment culture and the dispossessed which, to a certain extent, it is. Yet the 'interpretive' book is written by the foremost woman prehistorian in Britain; just as many professors and senior archaeologists appear in this as in the other book (though none appear in both). The 'science' book contains theory, research proposals and speculative ideas as well as 'facts'. Both books need to be read. Some people will hate the 'interpretive' book and others will love it, whereas the 'science' book is unlikely to stir strong emotions,
  Science and Stonehenge contains some noteworthy papers. Some of these are largely summaries of earlier contributions to the enormous excavation report on Stonehenge, so ably put together by Cleal and her colleagues. There is also a certain amount of speculation from the evidence, towards broader interpretations of the monument and its landscape, which was lacking in the excavation report. In a departure from the emphasis on uncontestable knowledge, there is a debate between opposing factions
943
on whether the Welsh bluestones were brought by glaciers or by people. Williams-Thorpe, who doesn't get listed as a contributor, considers that the bluestones were brought by ice, not for any scientific reasons but because of her preconceptions about Neolithic society. Presumably expecting that people would only have bothered to carry the blue dolerite, she seems not to understand that the multiple rock types brought from Wales might relate to links between people and places rather than to neocapitalist commodity extraction. The discovery of bluestones in earlier ancestral monuments should suggest that some stones were brought as part of a long-term relationship between the regions just as much as it might be accounted for by glacial movement. For myself, the lack of glacially derived sediments containing bluestone pebbles in the Stonehenge region, pointed out in Green's and Scourse's papers, makes the glacier hypothesis highly unlikely. Lawson's summary of the Stonehenge sequence is a useful distillation of the new view of the monument's 1500-year phasing, condensing the results of the team who actually did the research. Bayliss et aL examine some of the statistical procedures used in interpreting the radiocarbon dates. David & Payne present the results of geophysical survey in the environs. Allen examines the use of the landscape from the remarkable Early Mesolithic post constructions to the Early Bronze Age. It is a useful integration of environmental and archaeological evidence, but it assumes too much about the sedentary nature of Neolithic farming regimes and fails to consider that the occupation areas around Stonehenge, instead of being simply the farming areas where surplus for monument-building was generated, may have been primarily temporary encampments and ceremonial places connected with building and worship — the economy to support the stones' must have drawn on much wider and more sporadic networks beyond the monument's immediate landscape. Whittle's paper makes some important observations about the significance of stone as a durable medium. His suggestion of deliberate pairings of dressed and rough stones forming the trilithons is interesting, but I remain to be convinced. Darvill uses principles of homology to suggest that Stonehenge was constructed as a microcosm of the surrounding landscape with the circle mimicking the horizon and the entrances matching the entry and exit of the Avon into a 10km diameter circle around the monument. Microcosmic representations of the perceived world and universe are well documented in many cultures, but Darvill's model is not convincing, The horizon is not a perfect circle because of topography; surely the perfect circularity of the monument mirrors the sun and/or moon. Equally the Avon homology works from our cartographic bird's-eye perspective but not from the point of view of people's sight-lines and
944
movements along route ways and paths. As the viewshed analysis (reproduced in Ruggles' chapter) demonstrates, the landscape around was organized not in perfect circles but according to topographic visibility. The significance of the linkage, via the Avon, with the woodhenges at Durrington is lost because the Avenue's eastern end is considered as a later addition despite the new dating framework. Ruggles' paper is a sensible study of the possible and likely astronomical orientations of Stonehenge. His conclusion, that there are only a few unequivocal sightlines on lunar and solar positions, should lay to rest previous notions of astronomical observatories and computers. Richards & Whitby's paper on the televised experimental erection of a trilithon is almost as enjoyable as the programme and recognizes the limitations of experimental archaeology outside a cultural context other than our own. Batchelor describes how the World Heritage Site of Stonehenge and its enviorons was mapped. Wainwright lists key issues for future study. His list seems exhaustive but there are several crucial research objectives missing. The Mesolithic posts are among the earliest monumental architectural structures in the world and may be part of a much longer alignment; geophysical survey should be able to establish whether anomalies detected to the east in 1982 (but sadly not published in this volume) are part of the east—west alignment. Equally, more work could be done at Durrington Walls, between its entrance and the river and along the course of the Avon to the start of the Avenue.
  Stonehenge: making space is written by Barbara Bender in a style which is wholly new to academic archaeology. Its copious photographs, cartoons, quotations and dialogues with other academics and festivallers are arranged in an attractive layout which, along with Bender's provocative and informal writing style, makes for an accessible read. For those interested only in Stonehenge-as-artefact, chapter 2 is concerned with the Neolithic and Bronze Age use of the monument. There is much here that concurs with Whittle's emphasis on the materiality of stone, expanding the discussion to wood and chalk. Interestingly, both draw heavily on the ethnographic analogy of the Zafimaniry of Madagascar. There is more of this 'straight archaeology' in chapter 4, detailing the monument's use from Medieval times, to be read in conjunction with chapter 5, dialogues with Hutton and Ucko who correct her over-emphasis on the repressive power of the Church. However, the beauty of this book lies in its reflective 'other way of telling'. The introduction gives the reader Bender's personal story of how the book came to be written and what people, books and ideas have made an impact on it and on her general outlook. All autobiographies can be assumed to be partial, and she leaves hanging various questions of her intellectual links to the material. The cartoon section at the end of this chapter is reminiscent of the Beginners' guides and provides a discussion of theory for the theoretically challenged — or frightened. Chapter 1 takes us through a history of landscape studies, principally W.G. Hoskins and Raymond Williams, to her starting-point in which landscapes must be seen as embodied by social practices and contested through unequal power relations. Dialogues with archaeologists Edmonds, Tilley and Tringham are followed by a dialogue with free-festivallers Jones, Burtage and Aitken. In contrast to the professionals' obsession with power, agency, biographies and contesting of landscape, their refreshing perspective emphasizes co-operation and evolving tradition, accusing archaeologists of unwittingly incorporating theoretical baggage derived from the atomized, individualistic, self-obsessed capitalist world of today to parade as applicable social theory. Chapter 6 picks up from chapter 4, on contested landscapes, to tell us about Bender's involvement in political campaigning against access restrictions at Stonehenge and the élitist, masculine narratives to which archaeologists served as apologists. Initially hesitant, she agreed to co-ordinate the travelling exhibition 'Stonehenge Belongs to You and Me', which is the subject of much of this chapter. The last two chapters are composed of dialogues, increasingly wide-ranging, from Catalhöyük in Turkey to an American exhibition on Japan, and to a London exhibition on the historical depth of ethnic diversity in Britain. One of the dialogues is an imaginary conversation with an English Heritage official, since English Heritage declined an interview. It's an amusing idea but the 'tapescript' is contrived and stilted, highlighting the liveliness of the authentic voices. It is a very enjoyable book written in an enticing and stimulating format but, like Science and Stonehenge, it has its drawbacks. The main one is that it claims to be a liberating and democratic alternative to current academic ideology, yet it is obsessively concerned with two tiny minorities within Britain. There are many voices which are not heard in this book — those are the huge majority, the millions who visit Stonehenge and pay into the system which enables archaeologists and free-festivallers to enjoy the lifestyles that they do. Even with such an excellent book there is still a whiff of preciousness and introspective absorption.
REVIEW
  
REVIEW
  
REVIEW
  
