NOTES
Chlorine-36 dating and the bluestones of Stonehenge
OLWEN WILLIAMS-THORPE, D. GRAHAM JENKINS t , JUDITH JENKINS & JOHN S. WATSON*
The bluestones of Stonehenge on Salisbury Plain continue to attract controversy. Nevv dates on Stonehenge material using the Chlorine-36 method have been reported as evidence that the bluestones were moved from their Welsh sources by human transport, not by glaciation. Here Olwen Williams-Thorpe and colleagues, who have argued for the glacial transport theory, show that the Chlorine-36 dates have been misinterpreted.

Chlorine-36 dating has important potential for archaeology, but recent Chlorine-36 dates on 'bluestones' of Stonehenge have been misinterpreted. Professor D.Q. Bowen of the University of Wales, Cardiff and colleagues have dated a fragment of igneous rock reported as having been found at Stonehenge (exact type unknown, but not a spotted dolerite) at 14,000±1900 years, and surfaces of outcrops at Carn Menyn in Preseli at 5400±400 and 4900±400 years (Bowen et al. 1994; Bowen 1994: 211). This information has been interpreted as indicating that the bluestones of Stonehenge could not have been transported to the site of Stonehenge by ice, because the ice sheets were extensive enough only at c. 400,000 years or earlier, when the fragment and outcrop were apparently still buried or covered, and not exposed for ice transport (Bowen 1994: 211; Hawkes 1994; British Archaeology News 1995).
  Chlorine-36 dating gives an estimate of the length of time that a rock surface has been exposed to the atmosphere, by measuring the amount of Chlorine-36 produced by exposure of the rock to cosmic radiation. If the rock or surface has been covered or buried, the date obtained will reflect the reduced time of exposure to air. Thus a Chlorine-36 date may reflect either recent exposure of a surface due to processes such as frost shattering, or an original exposure date. This difficulty of interpretation is why Chlorine-36 dating is normally done on boulders or lava surfaces whose erosional history is known (e.g. Phillips et al. 1991).
  Professor Bowen and colleagues have obtained a date of c. 14,000 years exposure time for the fragment from Stonehenge. However, it is not possible to tell if this is an original exposure date, or if the fragment was brought to Salisbury Plain by ice 400,000 years ago or earlier, and was subsequently buried within superficial deposits on Salisbury Plain for part of its history. Or it could have been broken off a larger erratic lying on Salisbury Plain, by natural processes such as frost shattering. The rock type of this fragment is unknown, and the sample now completely destroyed (Professor D.Q. Bowen, in discussion at the meeting of the Lithic Studies Group, Cardiff, 28 January 1995), so it may be nothing to do with the bluestone monoliths.
  Carn Menyn loses material from outcrop surfaces every year through frost shattering. This will reduce the date obtained on an outcrop. A date of 5000 years could represent a preserved quarried surface (in which case it might be expected to show quarry marks), or it could be a frost-shattered surface. Even if it is a quarried surface, its relevance to Stonehenge is questionable, because the bluestones were erected there about 4000 years ago.
  Thus, even if it is considered that the bluestones were moved by human transport, the Chlorine-36 dates do not tell us at what era that movement might have taken place.
  The article in British Archaeology suggests that dating a monolith surface of a bluestone at Stonehenge will resolve the problem. Unfortunately, it will not. At least some of the

* Olwen Williams-Thorpe & John S. Watson, Department of Earth Sciences, The Open University, -Milton Keynes N IK 7 6AA, England. D. Graham Jenkinst(deceased) & Judith Jenkins, Tho Old Chapel, Pitton, Rhossili, Swansea SA3 1 131 1 , Wales.
Received 20 March 1995, accepted 12 September 1995.
ANTIQUITY 69 (1995): 1019—20
1020	NOTES

bluestones were dressed and the argument continues about which, and how many were altered in this way. Some have also been damaged by tourists. A dressed or damaged bluestone will give a Chlorine-36 date reflecting total exposure time — for example, about 4000 years if it is dressed but not subsequently damaged. A variety of older dates could be obtained, depending on whether the bluestone was removed from Wales by a glacier as an erratic, buried for part or all of its glacial transport, or broken up by erosional processes in post-glacial times.
References
BOWEN D.Q. 1994. Late Cenozoic Wales and south-west England, Proceedings of the Ussher Society 8: 209—13.
BOWEN, D,Q., F.M. PHILLIPS & D. ELMORE. 1994. Chlorine36 dating British ice-sheets, Abstracts of the American Geophysics Union, 1994 Fall Meeting: 226.
British Archaeology. 1995. Dating gives clue to Stonehenge riddle, British Archaeology 1 (February).
  We welcome further evidence in the Stonehenge debate, but are concerned about misinterpretations. Chlorine-36 dating might help the debate by obtaining large numbers of dates on Preseli outcrops (to give a mean date of oldest exposed surfaces). Dates on monoliths at Stonehenge could be useful if obtained for undressed and undamaged surfaces, but even these would be subject to interpretation. In the meantime, Chlorine-36 dates give no evidence either for or against glacial transport of the bluestones of Stonehenge.
HAWKES, N. 1994. Stonehenge dating dispels icesheet theory, The Times: 5 December 1994.

Additional comments on blood residue analysis in archaeology
JEFF D. LEACH & RAYMOND P. MAULDIN*
A complement to a paper early in this year's volume of ANTIQUITY reports experience vvith searching for blood-residue traces with the services of a commercial testing laboratory.PHILLIPS, F.M., M.G. ZREDA, S.S. SMITH, D, ELMORE, P.W. KUBIK, R.I. DORN & DJ. RODDY. 1991. Ago and geomorphic history of Meteor Crater, Arizona, from cosmogenic 26Cl and in rock varnish, Geochimica et Cosnwchimica Acta 55: 2695—8.

In the March ANTIQUITY, Eisele et al. (1995) presented immunological results from prehistoric sites, and from simulated archaeological contexts, which suggest that residues will not survive on prehistoric stone tools. Over the last several years, we have submitted over 200 archaeological items to a commercial laboratory for immunological residue analysis. In an effort to evaluate the reliability of these archaeological results, we initiated an actualistic test using experimentally generated artefacts coated with blood of known animals. Here, we present results for 54 of these experirnental samples. Our results also suggest that archaeologists should view immunological results with caution.
  The 54 experimental samples reflect a variety of artefact types and materials encountered archaeologically. Using 10 species of animals collected from recent road kills and commercial butchers, we coated freshly knapped artefacts with blood by cutting and scrapping a specimen for several minutes. After allowing the artefacts to dry, we removed visible hairs from several of the specimens by wiping them with a cotton cloth or lightly rubbing them with sand. However, in almost all cases blood was still visible macroscopically, and it is our opinion that this procedure did not remove the blood from any' specimens. Several 'blank' lithic tools and sediment samples, along with sediment and fire-cracked rock (FCR) samples from a.n experimental hearth used to cook a rabbit, were also submitted for analysis.

* Centro dc Investigaciones Arqueologicas, 140 N. Stevens, Brewhousc Tower, Suite 202, El Paso TX 79905, LJSA
Received 20 January 1995, revisecl 16 June 1995, accepted 16 September 1995.
ANTIQUITY 69 (1995): 1020-22
