68	ANTIQUITY
  
enquiry, but none the less has a meretricious attraction for those who treat jargon as a substitute for thought. I fear that even Hodder's apologia for his own brand of symbolist 'structuration', which steers well clear of the wilder shores of 'high' structuralism, goes far beyond what the inherent limitations of inference in archaeology will allow.
  Archaeologists have long been guilty, though much to their benefit, of borrowing techniques from other disciplines. Now that we have apparently lost our innocence, do we have to steal theoretical underclothes from other peoples' washing-lines to cover our shameful nakedness? Sir Edmund Leach prophesied correctly a few years ago that the next '-ism' to be taken up by archaeologists in search of a theory would be structuralism; but nearly 30 years ago Christopher Hawkes and Margaret Smith showed separately, and with irrefutable logic, where the boundaries lie of valid inference from archaeological data. Nothing has happened since to shake their conclusions. A real theory of archaeology, based on the nature and limitations of the evidence, has to recognize that there are many aspects of the past, and particularly of the text-free past, which are absolutely unknowable and always will be, because the evidence is of its nature ambiguous. Why should we be ashamed of having failed to achieve the impossible? R. J. C. ATKINSON
Christopher Chippindale: Stonehenge complete. London, Thames & Hudson, 1983. 296 pp., 260 illustrations, 13 in colour. Æ12.S0.
A decade and a half ago, Jacquetta Hawkes opened an article in these pages with the now well-known aphorism—'Every age has the Stonehenge it deserves—or desires. ' Now Mr Chippindale has produced a book which charts and illustrates the changing intellectual and emotional attitudes displayed towards the monument by the general public, antiquaries and archaeologists, painters and poets, scientists and government officials, over the ages, not omitting the mystics from their honourable beginnings to their tawdry remnants in the pitiful credulities of today. He presents Stonehenge as a microcosm of social history in which are reflected many larger issues; developing views of prehistory, questions of diffusion and independent invention, the status of the intellectual achievement of early man, methods and aims in excavation, private and public responsibilitv for ancient monuments. To the painters and draughtsmen the stones changed their mood from the craziness of a half-invented insana substructio to Inigo Jones's stern inaccuracy of a Roman temple, and thence as the vision of the past and the landscape shifted, to embodiments of the Picturesque and the Sublime, or as a poster by McKnight Kauffer.
  Roger Gale, when Stukeley first put forward to him his ideas of Stonehenge and Avebury in 1730, thought the approach 'promises at the same time both the utile and the dulce', and so (with no invidious comparison of the two works) Mr Chippindale affords the reader both instruction and entertainment, It is convenient and useful, for instance, to have a succinct account of the astronomical theories of Stonehenge from Stukeley by way of Petrie and Lockyer to Thom and Hoyle; again, there is a very good account of the attitudes to, and the first beginnings of systematic excavation of the site from 1900, itself bound up with questions of ownership and public access. The coming and going of theory over the years is shown as continuous, so that Piggott's xMycenaeans take their place with the Phoenicians of Aylett Sammes. And all this with precise documentation and reference to original sources, many not easy to come by.
  But side-by-side with this, Stonehenge has always had its entertainment value and attracted the bizarre and curious. Here the author has clearly enjoyed himself, and conveys his pleasure to the reader. Portable Stonehenges appear in improbably alien landscapes in paintings from the eighteenth century onwards, and even cross the Atlantic to adorn a lovely Hudson River school arcadian landscape by Thomas Cole in 1836, but who would expect a small Stonehenge lapped by the tide on a lonely mud-flat as in Barbara Boudochon's Victorian watercolour? She was not the only talented lady to be inspired by the monument, for NIiss Gwendolyn Stanhope performed exercises with Indian clubs there in 1896, and musical visitors to Bournemouth in 1931 could have heard the first (and only) performance of a symphonic poem 'Stonehenge' by Miss Susan Spain-Dunk. Queen Victoria's visit seems apocryphal folk-lore, but Prince Leopold and friends were photographed there at a picnic, and jolly rustic parties with bicycles and wagonettes followed suit. And so, as a mirror of its age, we finally see Stonehenge today, forlorn among over-full lavatories and hot-dog stands, and the pathetic squalor of those who revere the words of Ogloalala, mystic poet of the Sioux.
STUART PIGGOTT
Robert Chapman, Ian Kinnes & Klaus Randsborg: The archaeology of death. Cambridge: University Press, 1981. 160 pp., 97 illustrations. {17.50.
This book was conceived bv the Editors at the same time when two of them were organizing the programme for the 1979 Spring conference of the Prehistoric Society in London, with the same title. It contains nine papers, of which some were given at the conference, and an introductory and thoughtful essay by Chapman and Randsborg which sets the papers and the conference in a broader perspective.
  The mne papers varv widelv in time and space. Chapman and Kinnes write on European megaliths, Randsborg on death in the Viking Age and its relation to the Danish State; James A. Brown provides a case study of five cemetery sites dating from the eighteenth and mneteenth centuries in the central plains of North
