62	ANTIQUITY
  
work will already be completely out of date. One only has to look at the volumes published before the second world war to understand that these fine publications have a limited life. This point is highlighted by our experience over the past decade when our rapidly developing ability to recognize sites and our understanding about the relationships about former land use is constantly changing. Therefore the justification for publication of a volume of this sort must be as an example or sample of the type of information present and the way it can be recorded. If it serves as a stimulus to work of a similar nature by other bodies and individuals, then it is to be wholly applauded.
  At a time when Commission resources are scarce it is questionable whether it can afford the luxury of production of many volumes of this type. The Commission must now re-assess its role in survey in the late twentieth and early twenty-first centuries, It is undoubtedly one of the most experienced and skilled organizations of its type in the world and it should now address itself to providing a national survey service commensurate with these qualities. This is perhaps much to ask when the organization of British archaeology stumbles from crisis to crisis, but hopefully there are signs that the radical review necessary is already taking place. R. T. ROWLEY
Colin Burgess: The age of Stonehenge (Archaeology in the Landscape Series.) London: Dent, 1980. 402 pp., 82 figs., 19 pls. ß12.oo.
The title of this book, which was chosen by the publisher, is at the same time both apt and misleading. It is misleading in its emphasis on one spectacular monument, when the book itself provides a balanced account of artifacts, settlements and society, but the successive phases of Stonehenge do span the chronological compass of this work. Burgess is concerned, not with the traditional Bronze Age, with or without its Beaker Folk, but with the entire period from the mid-third millennium bc to the Penard industrial phase over 1,500 years later. In doing so, he follows the logic of the monuments rather than the arbitrary limits imposed by the Three Age model. In the same way the chronological periods in his book are named after well-dated type sites rather than changes in technology or pottery styles. This approach is amply justified.
  The outline of this book is deceptively simple. The first part amounts to a thorough review of the chronology of this whole period, taking in field monuments as well as excavated artifacts. The arrangement of the primary data is logical, persuasive and internally consistent, and includes an impressive analysis of the early metal industry. The presentation, however, raises two important problems. There is a constant oscillation between calibrated and uncalibrated dates, which the reader may find confusing, especially since Burgess has adopted McKerrell's rather dubious 'historical' curve for this purpose. It is also confusing that the type sites for two of his periods, Meldon Bridge and Knighton Heath, are partly or wholly unpublished. Mount Pleasant, another of his type sites, was continuously occupied for some 700 radiocarbon years.
  In the second part there follow chapters on social organization, settlement patterns, industry, burial and ritual. All of these are illuminated by a very wide range of reading, but the author has not been well served by the rather strange subject index provided by the publisher. Jacquetta Hawkes comes under J in between 'invasions—hypothesis' and the 'Kellythorpe warrior', and Professor Piggott takes his bow between 'people—surgery' and 'Pilsgate Man'.
  There are many good ideas in these chapters, but their quality is a little uneven. The economic evidence is exaggerated and the section on social organization relies too much on material from Denmark for local colour. The chapter on burial practices is certainly the strongest and contains many original and penetrating points. It is the most radical chapter of this book and deserves further expansion, Each of the chapters in this section is well documented and up-to-date.
  The whole account is illuminated by a series of arresting observations which give the book its distinctive character and may inspire a new generation of research. These include a powerful onslaught on the Beaker Folk, who wither under Burgess's fire; a perceptive reappraisal of the meaning of 'primary' and 'secondary' burials; a useful discussion of pottery styles as evidence of social, rather than chronological variation; and the acceptance of Deverel—Rimbury ceramics as the domestic assemblage of the late Wessex Culture. In each of these cases Burgess breaks away from the received view of artifact styles as reflexions of ethnic or chronological differences and comes closer to the real complexity of the evidence.
REVIEWS	63  In these respects this book consolidates a range of alternative interpretations of the Late Neolithic and Early Bronze Age, and in doing so places more emphasis on social and economic patterns than has been conventional. This is entirely acceptable. Its weakness, on the other hand, is in explaining these new configurations. Some of the concepts used by Burgess are not very clearly defined, while other ideas are rather familiar and reappear without suffcient discussion. The idea of 'constant culture contact' is too vague to explain much and is not very different from diffusion, while climatic deterioration is becoming the King Charles's Head of British archaeology. The book ends, as the index foretold, with the invasion hypothesis, and Burgess suggests an influx of new people from a little-explored region of France. This reviewer cannot accept either the reality or the dating of some of the 'changes' at this time.
  But I do not want to end on a critical note. It is more important that we agree on the fundamental ordering of the data than on the models within which we interpret them. Explanations can be tested and changed, but only when we understand the raw material. Burgess's book is a brave attempt to grapple with a mass of disorganized data, and his ordering of this material is a prerequisite for further progress. There are exciting new ideas here. Let us hope that the author will go on to provide equally radical interpretations. In the meantime this is a good book and will be essential reading.
RICHARD BRADLEY
Lloyd Laing: Celtic Britain. Britain before the Conquest series. London & Henley: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1979. 190 pp., 109 pls., 3 maps.
I see no purpose in commenting at any great length on this work, or in repeating the prolonged hatchetjobs executed—rightly—on the Laings' last two offerings by Catherine Hills (Antiquity, Lll, 237—8) and Nicholas Reynolds (ibid., 241—3). This is a poor book, in a generally unnecessary series, cobbled up by a General Editor who inspires in me no confidence whatsoever. Celtic Britain is not, as a book club puff assured us, 'a brilliant new overview of the Celts, from European origins to Celtic twilight'. It emphatically does not, as the blurb proclaims, 'introduce new material on the growth of a specifically Celtic Christianity'. It hardly could, since this is not a valid concept.
  Chapters 1 and 2 make up a popularized digest of the Celts in Europe and pre-Roman Britain (an iron age enthusiast might be moved to comment on Map 1, one of only three maps that we are given). As for the impact of the Romans upon the Celtic British (Ch. 3), Kenneth Jackson might never have written LHEB, nor Frere and Co. produced all those mighty Romano-British histories. Ch. 5 ('Epilogue : Celtic Twilight') follows a current trend in such works, but is as unnecessary as it is inexpert. The reading-list is very little use (183—4); it was unkind to revive H. M. Chadwick's Early Scotland, best forgotten—all Homers nod once—and I found it somehow distasteful to be told that John Morris's Age of Arthur is 'alas extremely unreliable in places in its interpretation.' (It is, at the very least, a piece of sustained and brilliant, if wayward, originality, from a powerful and intricate mind.) The general reader, poor soul, will search in vain for a copy of Jacobsthal and Jope, Early Celtic Art in Britain (Oxford, 1977) . . .
  Chapter 4 covers the author's main interest: what he calls, in this case perhaps with justification, The Dark Ages. Far from shedding new light on the post-Roman Insular Church, or post-Roman anything, the author—writing in 1978/early 1979 was apparently unwilling to profit from a decade or more of accessible scholarship. I find no hint of acquaintance with recent work by David Dumville, D. P. Kirby, Mollie Miller, John Morris, Edward Thompson, et al. Is the RKP 'non-specialist audience' deemed unready for alternative ideas? I select a few aspects, for illustration rather than extended castigation. It is arguable (125) whether Patrick knew the work of St Augustine, at best a very marginal influence in the Confessio, at all, and where are Bieler, (hrney and Hanson in all this ? How can (127) an 'addition' to 'Nennius', a compilation described (121) as 'tenth-century', which purports to give real dates of 518 and 539, possibly be described as ':fairly reliable'? If this was lifted from Alcock's Arthur's Britain, why not say so, and say how this point was received in 1971 ? As for Cunedda (132), no serious student could have written about this myth as if it were an historical fact (and why not say that Nora Chadwick thought it a myth, too The Coel Hen (137)—ruling where ?—who sent praefecti into sub-Roman ,Scotland to found native states must at once revert to being 'a familiar figure from the nursery'. Andiwhat is the reason for describing Vortigern (126) as 'a notable of Gloucester', like a fifth-century Dr Foster ? The detail is occasionally slipshod. The person Voteporix is not described on his tombstone as 'Vortepor Protector', but as (nom.) Voteporix Protictor—Laing should know, since what N. Reynolds calls a 'quite extraordinarily primitive' drawing of this stone appears on p. 102 of Late Celtic Britain, &c. Bede never wrote (122), and never intended to write, a 'Historia Ecclesiae'.
  It gives me no pleasure to go on in this vein, and the rest of this review is written with concern; it is written because it is time that someone said this, publicly. It is better said, too, by an old Edinburgh hand than by anyone else unaware that the author of Celtic Britain is an intelligent, highly competent archaeologist with a record of original fieldwork, an enviable visual sense and memory, and the ability to undertake and publish researches that add, materially, to our knowledge of British protohistory. His wife and partner in these unfortunate perpetrations appears to be not noticeably less gifted or able. To many of us, it is just not credible that Celtic Britain, and other recent books from the Laing family typewriter, were written to enhance his/their
