The 1Dorset Cursus
by R. J. C. ATKINSON
Edinburgh University
    F all the early prehistoric monuments of Britain the Dorset Cursus is both the largest and at the same time one of the least known. Its claim to pre-eminence in terms of mere size is sufficiently established by the facts that it is six miles in length, contains an area of two hundred and twenty acres, and in its original state comprised a volume of earthwork amounting to some six-and-a-half million cubic feet. The significance of these figures may better be appreciated by a comparison with Avebury, which had originally an earthwork volume of about three-and-a-half million cubic feet, or with the Stonehenge Cursus, which is a little less than one-and-three-quarter miles in length, and encloses only seventy acres.
    The Dorset Cursus follows an undulating and slightly sinuous course across the downs of Cranborne Chase, immediately sw. of the Dorset-Wiltshire border. Its general direction is from sw. to NE. , running roughly parallel to and half-a-mile SE. of the present main road (A.354) from Blandford Forum to Salisbury. The central portion of the Cursus, a length of about three miles from the crest of Gussage Down to a point half-amile sw. of the village of Pentridge, has long been known and marked on the maps of the Ordnance Survey. This portion appears to have been observed first by William Cunnington early in the 19th century, and was recorded by him in his manuscript notes now preserved in the library of the Society of Antiquaries l . This account was used by Sir Richard Colt Hoare, who evidently considered the Cursus and the later earthworks associated with it on Gussage Down to be of suffciently outstanding interest to warrant their inclusion in the second volume of his Ancient Wiltshire2 , even though they lay outside the boundary of that county.
    Later references to the Cursus add but little to Colt Hoare's original publication. Warne, reproducing Hoare's plan3, evidently had an inkling of the continuation of the earthwork beyond its visible ends, though the course he suggested was inaccurate. Sumner mentioned it briefly in connection with the settlement on Gussage Down4, and recorded for the first time the incorporation in one of the banks of the Cursus of the long barrow SE. of Oakley Down5 . Crawford and Keiller, illustrating the Gussage Down sector with a vertical air-photograph6 , accord it only a passing mention, though some years later Crawford, in a prescient note 7 , suggested that it was highly probable that the Cursus extended for at least another mile and three-quarters 8 . The latest notice of the
THE DORSET CURSUS
monument was that published by Dr J. F. S. Stone when discussing the affnities of the Stonehenge Cursus 9.
    In 1948 the present writer was led to undertake a detailed examination of the Dorset Cursus, as part of the comparative study of the analogues of the similar but smaller cursus then under excavation at  Fieldwork aided by air-photographs10, carried out at intervals up to the spring of 1953, has made it possible to add some one-and-a-half miles to each end of the Cursus as known hitherto, and to locate its extreme ends on Thickthorn Down and Bokerly Down respectively. Its course, where not visible in relief on the surface, has been established by probing the ditch-filling at intervals of about 200 feet, and has subsequently been confirmed by air-photographs kindly taken at the writer's suggestion by Dr J. K. St. Joseph, four of which are here reproduced (PLATES I—IV).
    Like similar monuments elsewhere, the Cursus consists of a long narrow enclosure, bounded on each side by parallel lines of bank and external ditch, with the short ends closed by transverse stretches of earthwork continuous with the sides. Its full extent is shown in FIG. 1. Owing to its great length it has been necessary to reproduce the plan at a relatively small scale, which makes it impossible to show accurately a number of minor irregularities referred to in the detailed description which follows.
    The sw. end of the Cursus lies on Thickthorn Down (31 /970124) immediately NW. of a small long barrow (Map of Neolithic Wessex [1933], no. 163), on the broad grass verge which borders the NE. side of the road from Farnham to Horton (PLATE 1). It consists of a three-sided rectangular bank with external ditch, the bank still standing where best preserved to a height of about 4 feet above the surrounding turf. The over-all measurement of the earthwork is about 60 feet, but the bank is undoubtedly much spread on both sides, and may originally have been separated from the ditch by a narrow berm. The distance between the centres of the ditches is 300 feet. The transverse end is well preserved, and is slightly convex in plan. The corners are rounded, and the bank there higher than elsewhere, owing to the additional spoil derived from the ditch on both sides of the angle. The two sides, on the other hand, have been breached and largely obliterated by tracks running parallel to the present road, especially near the hedge. This destruction, coupled with the virtual absence of visible signs of the continuation of the earthwork into the arable ground NE. of the hedge, has been responsible for the true nature of the monument having passed for so long unrecognized. The site was planned by Sumnerll, but his figure is inaccurate in showing the end of the Cursus as concave, and in restoring it conjecturally as a square enclosure.
    The NW. angle of the earthwork is approached from the sw. by a triple dyke of three parallel banks and ditches, facing SE. As it comes close to the Cursus, the line of the dyke swerves to the NW., presumably to avoid the bank and ditch of the former, which must already have been in existence at the time (PLATE 1). The dyke continues for some distance down the slope to the NE., parallel to the NW. side of the Cursus,• but its full extent in this direction is unknown.
    In the arable field immediately NE. of the road the Cursus can at first be traced in slight relief on the surface, and as well-defined soil-marks. An air-photograph taken by the writer in the summer of 1949 showed a distinct and sharp-edged band of mole-heaps,

    9 Arch. Journ., CIV (1948), 10—11.
    10 In particular a very fine sortie taken by the R.A.F. in 1943 (no. HLA/651), at a scale of approximately 1 : 15,000, kindly lent by Mr Brian Hope-Taylor, F.S.A. 11 Sumner, op. cit., 35—6, pl. XVI.
ANTIQUITY
suggestive of a buried ditch, running north-eastwards from the hedge for about 150 feet, parallel to and some 100 ft. within the SE. side of the Cursus. No corresponding mark can be seen, however, on other air-photographs, nor has probing on the site revealed any trace of a ditch.
    Below the 300 feet contour, where the northern slope of the down steepens, surface indications of the Cursus fade out, and only a faint soil- or crop-mark remains. The course of the two ditches has been traced by probing, however, as far as the nearer boundary of the water-meadows fringing the banks of the Gussage Brook in the valley bottom. Here, after swinging slightly southeastwards as it descends the slope, the SE. ditch runs parallel and very close to the hedge which points towards the buildings of Higher Farm beyond the stream (PLATE 1). In the spring of 1953 it was partially exposed in section in a hole dug for a fence-post against the hedge.
    Neither ditch can be traced across the water-meadows, where they have presumably been buried by alluvium or destroyed by erosion, but the fact that the Cursus crossed the stream is shown by its re-appearance on the higher ground NE. of Higher Farm, the SE. ditch being represented, apparently, by a linear depression, probably deepened in recent times, extending for some 200 feet immediately behind the back door of the farmhouse. From here both ditches are visible in part as soil-marks, and have been traced throughout by probing, to the crest of Gussage Down (PLATE 1).
    The complex of earthworks on Gussage Down has been described and illustrated more than once, and needs no detailed mention here. The most prominent feature is the small long barrow (no. 164) standing on the summit of the down between the two ditches of the Cursus, which are here visible on the surface, though much denuded by cultivation. Though the axis of the long barrow is at right-angles to the line of the Cursus at this point, the mound is not centrally placed between the ditches. From this it may be inferred that the barrow is older than the Cursus, and that the latter was aligned so as to enclose it. Certainly the long barrow, which is visible for miles around, would form an obvious sighting-mark for the alignment of the Cursus, quite apart from any rituallydetermined intention on the part of the Cursus-builders to incorporate the barrow within the compass of their monument.
    North-east of the long barrow, on the slope of the down, a number of lynchets of a group of Celtic fields are super-imposed upon the course of the Cursus, whose banks can also be seen in places to have served as field-boundaries. Above and below the 300 feet contour two of these lynchets span the Cursus approximately at right-angles. As the course of the side-ditches makes a pronounced swerve at this point, it was suspected that the Cursus might originally have ended here, with a subsequent prolongation northeastwards, as is clearly the case on Bottlebush Down a mile and a half further on. Had this been so, either of these transverse lynchets might later have formed upon and have concealed the original end. Careful probing on both sites failed, however, to reveal any trace of a buried transverse ditch, and it must therefore be assumed that the Cursus was continuous down the slope of the hill, and indeed as far as the ' junction ' on Bottlebush Down.
    At the bottom of the slope of Gussage Down the Ordnance Map, followed by Sumner9, marks a sudden diminution in the width of the Cursus, the SE. ditch making a sharp double right-angled bend and continuing thereafter parallel to and within its former course. Probing showed that this marked course is in fact that of a prominent lynchet (shown on the plan, FIG. 1, immediately above the word ' lynchets '), and that the ditch of the Cursus continues on its previous course, though invisible on the surface.
THE DORSET CURSUS
    From this point onwards, across the nearly flat floor of the dry valley between Gussage and Wyke Downs, the Cursus cannot be traced in relief, owing to intensive cultivation, but its course is clearly visible from the air (PLATE Il). The SES ditch is regular, with only one marked change of direction soon after it emerges from the windbreak plantation of conifers associated with Down Buildings. The other ditch, however, can be seen to follow a markedly sinuous course between this point and the road which follows the valley floor at the foot of the rise to Wyke and Bottlebush Downs.
    From this road the Cursus climbs the hill in a straight line, crossed obliquely by the Roman road (Ackling Dyke) where it skirts the plantation, and comes to an end half way up the slope of Bottlebush Down (PLATE Ill). Here the two sides are joined transversely by a ditch and bank still visible on the surface, though now much flattened. The relative positions of the ditch and bank, and their continuity with the sides, show beyond doubt that they belong to the sw. portion of the Cursus already described, and that the continuation of the earthwork north-eastwards must be a later addition.
    This continuation is set at an angle to the line of the earlier structure. It is to be supposed that when it was added the original transverse end of the earlier section was defaced wholly or in part, in order to allow free passage. But modern cultivation has clearly altered the surface so much at this point that only excavation can now reveal the extent of this defacement.
    From this point the side earthworks continue up the slope to the crest of the down, where it is crossed by the road from Handley to Cranborne. In this sector the NW. side has been almost obliterated by ploughing, but the other side, crowned by a wire fence, affords the best example of the original appearance of the earthwork. A profile measured here is shown in FIG. 1.
    On the crest of the down, immediately NE. of the road, the NW. ditch makes a sudden outward swerve, suggesting the junction of two stretches of work, independently aligned from opposite directions, and failing to meet exactly. From here the Cursus descends the slope into a dry valley, on the far side of which it enters a dense plantation of conifers. Here the banks and ditches have been much worn down by earlier cultivation, but the latter can be traced almost throughout by the greater concentration of rabbit-burrows.
    Towards the NE. side of the plantation the NW. bank is interrupted by yet another small long barrow, rising as a bare turf-covered mound out of an almost impenetrable forest of close-set trees10. The barrow is 140 feet long, 40 feet wide, and some 7 feet high at the NE. end. The lateral quarry ditches are now barely visible on the surface, but their presence is amply attested by the relative concentration over them of rabbitburrows and mole-heaps. The Cursus bank is aligned upon, and runs up to, both ends of the barrow, but the axis of the latter is not co-incident with that of the bank, from which it differs by a clock-wise rotation of some 10 degrees. Here, as on Gussage Down, the inference is that the Cursus was aligned upon an already existing long barrow.
    After emerging from the NE. end of the plantation the Cursus is lost to view on the surface, and the remainder of its course, up to the last few hundred feet on Bokerly Down, has been traced entirely by probing, not even air-photographs being of much help in this section. Its line cuts across the modern field-boundaries, and almost the only visible clue to its direction, in this stretch of over a mile, is at a point 430 feet NW. of the school at Pentridge, where a stile, sited in a sudden kink in an otherwise straight hedge, marks the passage beneath it of the NW. ditch.
ANTIQUITY
    At a point 1300 feet NE. of the approach-road to Pentridge probing revealed two opposed causeways of unexcavated chalk in the line of the ditches, that on the NW. being 40 feet, and the other only 10 feet wide. There is no trace of these gaps on the surface, and their purpose is obscure. Similar unexplained gaps occur in the sides of the cursuses at Stonehenge and Dorchester-on-Thames. It may be added that so far as is known these are the only such gaps in the Dorset Cursus, though it is always possible that others may have passed undetected in sections where probing has been the only means of establishing the line of the ditches. 
    From these gaps the Cursus continues, swinging slightly to the S.E., to the foot of Bokerly Down, where the NW. ditch swings sharply inwards, narrowing the width between the ditches from 335 feet to 270 feet. In one field11 both ditches were plainly marked in the summer of 1948 by darker lines of growth in late (second) crop of hay. This is the only occasion on which the writer has anywhere observed such indications, identifiable at ground level, in this crop.
    Until 1953 the last few hundred feet of the Cursus, where it mounts the slope of Bokerly Down, were diffcult to trace in the rough grass, though already known from airphotographs taken ten years previously. In that year, however, renewed cultivation of the down revealed its details in a most striking manner (PLATE IV), showing the end of the Cursus squared off at right-angles with a straight length of transverse bank and ditch.
    As on Thickthorn Down, six miles away to the sw., this end of the Cursus appears to be related significantly to a long barrow, and one of more than ordinary length, lying a short way SE. of its E. corner, upon which the barrow is aligned. Its total length is 490 feet. It is divided into two unequal parts by a broad gap, which has in the past led to its identification as two separate long barrows laid end to end12 . But probing suggests that the ditches are continuous, and that in fact there is only one barrow of exceptional length. At its s. end there stands a separate round barrow, also somewhat mutilated.
    The association of the Cursus with no less than four long barrows, one of which (in the plantation) certainly, and another (on Gussage Down) probably antedates its construction, can hardly be fortuitous, and suggests not only that this remarkable structure should be referred to a late stage of the Windmill Hill culture, but also that its purpose must have been connected in some way with the cult of the dead, or at least with practices intended to ensure that the benign influence of the dead was transmitted, through the physical propinquity of their resting-places, to the living users of the Cursus. A similar association with a long barrow occurs at the Stonehenge cursus, and with analogous and apparently contemporary structures named ' long mortuary enclosures ' in two cursuses in the upper Thames valley (Dorchester-on-Thames and North Stoke) 13.
    Although nearly a score of cursus monuments, certain and probable, are now known in Britain, no other proved example has been recorded of the addition of one cursus to another, end to end14. Nor does any other cursus even approach in length either of the constituent portions of the Dorset Cursus, which represents a unique achievement in prehistoric construction. Though its over-all course is sinuous, long stretches are
    

facing P. 8
    
THE DORSET CURSUS
virtually straight, and can have been so laid out only after the clearing of a large area of thicket and other vegetation. This preliminary clearance must itself represent much labour, which should be added to that of building the earthwork itself in any assessment of the human effort involved.
    The width of the earthwork, from centre to centre of the ditches, is fairly constant at about 300 feet. All the obvious local irregularities occur in the NW. ditch. From this it may be conjectured that the SE. side was the one to be ranged out and marked initially on the ground, the position of the other ditch being determined by offsets taken from the former at intervals, and evidently not always measured with equal accuracy.
    Space here forbids a detailed discussion of the purpose of this and other cursuses. It is clear, however, that their function must have been religious or ceremonial, rather than domestic, and that the activity which took place in them was of a processional, or at least a linear pattern. Indeed, when one remembers the kind of ritual associated with the ancient Roman festival of the Lupercalia, in which young men, armed with whips cut from the hides of sacrificial goats, ran a race along a course marked out with stones, striking at the by-standers as they passed15, it may be that Stukeley's interpretation of the Stonehenge cursus as a race-course (though hardly, perhaps, for chariots) was not, after all, too wild a flight of fancy. But with such speculations this article is not concerned. Its purpose is merely to rescue from an undeserved oblivion this most remarkable prehistoric earthwork.
9
1 | am indebted to Lieut.-Colonel R. H. Cunnington for drawing my attention to this reference.
2 Colt Hoare, Ancient Wiltshire, 11 (1819), 33.
3 Charles Warne, Ancient Dorset (1872), 26—8.
4 Heywood Sumner, Ancient Earthworks of Cranborne Chase (1913), 73—4.
5 Sumner, op. cit., 50.
6 Crawford and Keiller, Wessex from the Air (1929), 113 and pl. XVI.
7 Ant. Journ., xv (1935), 78.
        8 Dr Crawford tells me that his suggestion referred to a possible extension sw. from Gussage Down, to and beyond Thickthorn Down, and was based on air-photographs (lost in the war) and suggestive alignments of field-boundaries, but not on actual field-work. The actual course of this missing section of the Cursus differs slightly from that suggested.
9 Sumner, op. cit., pl. XLIV.
        10 The safeguarding of the barrow from the deleterious effects of afforestation is due to the prompt action of Dr J. F. S. Stone.
11 Immediately NW. of the word ' Long ' in ' Long Barrows ' in FIG. 1.
12 Crawford and Keiller, Wessexfrom the Air (1928), 232.
       13 A detailed description and discussion of all known cursuses, long mortuary enclosures and allied structures will appear in the second volume of Excavations at Dorchester, Oxon.
        14 A possible though unproven instance has been recorded by Dr J. K. St. Joseph at Maxey, Northamptonshire, but the area of junction, if such there was, has been destroyed by graveldigging.
        15 The belief in the eficacy of a blow from one of the participants as a cure for barrenness in women points to an origin in a fertility ritual.
---------------
    
------------------------------------------------------------
    
    ---------------
    
    ------------------------------------------------------------
    
4
    
4
    
4
    

    

    

    

    

    

    
