ANTIQUITY, XLII, 1968	PLATES 1—111
Durrington Walls: a Ceremonial Enclosure of the 2nd Millennium BC by G. J. WAINWRIGHT
Interest in Durrington Walls has been maintained since Woodhenge was discovered and described by Mrs M. E. Cunnington in her article 'Prehistoric Timber Circles' in the first number of ANTIQUITY (1927, 92), and Crawford devoted an article to it two years later (1929, 49). In this article Dr Geoffrey Wainwright of the Inspectorate of Ancient Monuments, Ministry of Public Building and Works, summarizes his rescue excavations at Durrington Walls in the summers of 1966—7. The urgent necessity for these excavations has already been referred to in our previous issue (1967, 255).
  
IÄURRINGTON WALLS lies one L.' quarter of a mile to the north of the outskirts of Amesbury in Wiltshire and 9 miles north of Salisbury (SU 150437), Stonehenge is situated 2 miles to the south-east and 80 yds. to the south of the enclosure is Woodhenge which was excavated by Mrs Cunnington in 1926—8. The much ploughed bank, which encloses a dry valley opening on to the River Avon, was initially recorded by Sir Richard Colt Hoare in the early 19th century (1812, 169), but until the recently completed series of excavations the only digging on the site was that carried out by Professor Stuart Piggott in 1952, despite recognition of the enclosure as being one of the largest henge monuments in the country. The 1952 excavations were in the nature of an exploration on both sides of a pipe trench where it intersected with the bank in its southern sector (Stone, Piggott and Booth, 1954). A double row of post-holes was recorded along the outer edge of the bank and a quantity of animal bones, flints and sherds of Grooved Ware was found on top of the old land surface which was preserved beneath it. Sherds of Grooved Ware and two small fragments of Beaker were recorded from domestic refuse overlying the bank talus. Radiocarbon dates of 2620 40 and 2630 ± 70 BC were obtained from charcoal under the bank in its southern sector (Piggott, 1959, 289). These determinations were described by Professor Piggott as 'archaeologically unacceptable' as two small scraps of Beaker pottery were found in association with the abundant Grooved Ware.
  The external bank of the henge is very degraded as a result of centuries of ploughing and the eastern half of the interior is crossed by the A345. The bank is best preserved in its north-east sector where it is visible as a broad chalky mound 110 ft. wide with an internal ditch 40 ft. wide. This comparatively wellpreserved sector of bank and ditch terminates in an original entrance at the bottom of the combe at a point 200 ft. from the erosional cliff of the River Avon. The southern, western and north-western sectors of bank and ditch are either ploughed out or masked by subsequent lynchets. A west entrance is masked by a lynchet 10 ft. high and until recently the only evidence for its existence was an aerial photograph published by O. G. S. Crawford (1929, PL. 111), on which the rounded ditch terminals could be clearly seen. The existence of this
  
20
  
DURRINGTON WALLS
Gravel floor
GENERAL PLAN OF SOUTHERN CIRCLE
Chalk block platform
Rammed chalk
Flint cairn
Hearths
	123	Stake holes
124
	0125	Phase 1
0126
• 13	• 114	0 127
• 115	14%) 128	Phase 2a
146 • •
147 •0129
148 149.0130	Phase 2b
204
116
Iron Age
112 •
	111	Hut floor
80135
	110	0117	16	17	134
14
	109.	15
	13	15	19
	108	42	136
	118	20
39
	107.	40	41	21
	106	12
119
11
%GeneraI Plan of Hut
38
	120	Antler Picks
	62	153
	61	45
	121 •	23
60
139
37
65
16
82
	. 81	170	66
	59	167
79
92                                                                  172 16467	47 •
173
78141
	35	163
	179	93
57
162142
48181
77
182.'
	34	61	155
	56	160
49	1510	Y 163	85
	0 178	101	103	174
	76	95
	202	192
27
159
150
	100	18	70
	177	104
	55	191
	75	194	28
199
	189	197	200	195	185	144
156
71
29
	90	201
	74	51	LiGe of North-South Section
105176
157
3197
	10	15	20	25	35
	156	187	186	Scale in Feet
10
	53	73	Metres
, 52
Fig. 1. Durrington Walls: genera! plan of southern circle (drawn by Mrs C. Boddington)
  

  
entrance has now been established by means of a geophysical survey carried out in October 1967 by A. J. Clark from the Ancient Monuments Laboratory of the Ministry of Public Building and Works.
  It will be seen, therefore, that up to 1966 the very plan of the monument was conjectural, the ditch of the enclosure had never been sectioned and no excavation had been undertaken in the interior. In that year the Inspectorate of Ancient Monuments received notice of a new road alignment of the A345 from the Stonehenge Inn to Totterdown Clump which would cross the eastern half of the interior to the east of the old road. It was decided to excavate along the route of the proposed road prior to its construction and the author directed these operations in 1966 and 1967. Full cooperation was received from the Wiltshire County Council who, as owners of the land, permitted the excavation of the threatened areas. As a result of these excavations the route of the road was completely excavated where it crossed the bank and ditch and the interior of the site, with a few minor exceptions where areas were required for a spoil-heap and a machine run. In addition, the route of the road to the south of the henge, including a slip road to Woodhenge, was completely excavated as far as Totterdown Clump (PL. 1). The total length of the excavation was some 900 yds. and the width of the strip varied from 27 yds. to 50 yds. Mechanical excavators (JCB 3C types) were used to remove the plough-soil which was transported by dumper trucks—a technique initiated by the Inspectorate for the total excavation of an Iron Age enclosure in Cranborne Chase in 1965 and successfully employed since that time.
THE 1966 EXCAVATIONS
The excavations in 1966 were confined to the area north-west of the old road, where the nev•.' route was to cross the bank and ditch, and to the area immediately south of the bank of the henge in its southern sector. The results of these excavations are the subject of an interim report in the Antiquaries Journal (XLVII, 1967, pt. 11) and will be only briefly touched on here. Some 200 ft. to the south of the henge a sub-rectangular timber structure was located with overall dimensions of 54 ft. and 30 ft. Some Grooved Ware and domestic rubbish were found in the post-holes. The ditch in its northern sector was 41 ft. wide and 18 ft. deep from the modern surface, with a flat bottom 18•5 ft. wide. Very little pottery was obtained from its rapid silts, but a hearth on top of these silts produced sherds of a rusticated beaker, Rim sherds of Ebbsfleet type occurred above this hearth whilst Bronze Age and Iron Age material was recorded from the upper silts. The distance from the outer lip of the ditch to the inner edge of the bank was 115 ft. There were indications that the inner part of the bank had been ploughed away but even so we cannot assume a berm less than 60—70 ft. wide. In the east sector of the excavation the bank had been completely destroyed. Elsewhere it was preserved to a height of some 12 in. and rested on a fossil soil. On top of this soil was a rich occupation layer which produced pottery, flints, bone and charcoal. The pottery is mainly of Middle Neolithic character and of forms that can be paralleled in the ditches of the Windmill Hill causewayed camp, but it was associated with three sherds of Grooved Ware. There was no stratigraphic difference between these two ceramic styles and sherds of both groups rested directly on top of the fossil soil. If we interpret the Middle Neolithic material as a relic occupation much earlier than the
building of the bank (certainly the flint implements are patinated), then a possible explanation is provided for the radiocarbon determinations from the 1952 excavations, namely that the samples used were relics from a Middle Neolithic occupation which was not represented ceramically. Such a date in the middle of the 3rd millennium BC is acceptable for the Middle Neolithic material, but not, in the present state of knowledge, for Grooved Ware. However, radiocarbon determinations from the 1966—7 excavations will have to be obtained before taking this matter further.
THE 1967 EXCAVATIONS
Apart from the sub-rectangular structure located in 1966 the area excavated from the henge south to Totterdown Clump was devoid of any signs of human habitation except for a few widely spaced pits which produced no dating evidence. Woodhenge and the crest of the Avon valley lie to the west of this strip which is on an eastward facing slope. The timber structures and ditched enclosures excavated by Mrs Cunnington at the same time as Woodhenge appear to be confined to this higher ground.
THE BANK AND DITCH
Before the excavations, the bank and ditch in their southern sector were not visible as the result of ploughing and there was some dispute over the alignment of the ditch (Crawford, 1929). Excavation showed that the ditch was sited in part in the bottom of the combe and that the bank was sited some 90 ft. outside the ditch. The remarkable width of this berm corroborates the evidence from the 1966 excavations. The bank was some 100 ft. wide and best preserved under a plough lynchet which crosses the southern boundary of the henge, where it was preserved to a height of ft. Elsewhere it was only some 6—12 in. high. The bank material of chalk lumps derived from the ditch was removed over large areas to reveal the old land surface underneath it. From the top of this fossil soil was obtained a little Grooved Ware similar to that recorded from the 1952 excavations. There was no trace of any earlier ceramic material similar to that recorded underneath the bank in the 1966 excavations, although a few scattered post-holes clearly pre-dated the building of the henge bank by a considerable margin.
  A major result of the excavation of the ditch is that the causeway of the south-east entrance was located (PL. 11). It was quite simple with no post-holes for a gateway or barrier. In addition, the entire contents of the ditch were removed for a distance of 112 ft. from the terminal. At the top of its weathering cone the ditch was 59 ft. wide; it was 20 ft. deep from the modern surface, with steep sides and a flat bottom 22 ft. wide. A large quantity of pottery was found on the rock bottom of the ditch and in the primary silts. It consists mainly of Grooved Ware ornamented with slashed cordons together with a few sherds of Beaker pottery. The lenses of occupation refuse became appreciably richer as the ditch terminal was approached and produced quantities of pottery, bone, antler and flints which included one fragmentary chipped axe. Some 60 ft. from the terminal and resting on the rock bottom of the ditch was found a pile of 57 antler picks which presumably had been used to excavate the ditch into the natural chalk and which had been thrown into a pile when the terminal was completed. The enclosure ditch was also located at the extreme north end of the excavation immediately to the south of the old road. It was crossed by a pipe trench and was merely committed to plan.
THE SOUTHERN CIRCLE (PLS. 1 and 11, and

The post-holes of a complex circular timber structure were located 90 ft. north-west of the causeway into the main enclosure, on a comparatively flat piece of ground at the foot of the northern slope of the combe. These postholes and their associated features were excellently preserved by ft. of plough-soil which had silted down the slope into the valley bottom. Rather more than one half of the structure lay within the line of the proposed road; the remainder occurred to the west of it and was not excavated. The excavation of these post-holes revealed a complex sequence of timber structures—four of the Late Neolithic period and one of the late Iron Age. Of the former, three building phases are represented in a remarkable timber structure of Woodhenge type with an overall diameter of 127 ft. This sequence has been determined largely on the basis of post-hole intersections and comparison of post-hole sizes.
  Phase 1. A series of four concentric circles of post-holes whose diameters from the outer circle are as follows: 75 ft., 50 ft., 26 X 24 ft. and ft. At a distance of 19 ft. to the SE of the outer circle the structure is fronted by a nearly straight palisade of timber posts, aligned NE—SW, which has a known length of 129 ft. The size and depth of the post-holes decrease towards the NE, possibly as a result of ploughing, although the height of the palisade may originally have been reduced towards its terminals. The post-holes of the circles average 2 ft. in diameter and in many cases have been cut through by the much larger post-holes of Phase 2. It is clear that several of the gaps in the circles are due to the post-holes having been destroyed in this reconstruction but also that spacing of the posts was never very regular. In the outer circle the average spacing (from centre to centre) is to ft. and on average the post-holes are from ft. deep. The postholes of circle 2 are more widely spaced and deeper (5—9 ft.) and there is a suggestion that they were grouped in pairs. Circle 3, slightly elliptical in plan, consists of only four postholes and occurred totally within the excavated area. The post-holes of this circle differ from the others in that they were provided with ramps to facilitate the raising of the posts and they may have supported a canopy over the central area. Two of these posts (nos. 191 and 195) were replaced once, and no. 188 was replaced twice. The inner circle of six posts, although it is the heart of the structure at this stage, did not encircle any burial or ritualistic feature. It is of importance to note that none of the posts at this stage was packed with chalk blocks but that rammed earth and powdered chalk were used and that the circles do not have common centres.
  The palisade or facade to the SE is of interest as it appears to restrict access to the circles from the quarter where the causeway across the enclosure ditch is situated. Unfortunately the faqade is much destroyed where the ramps of Phase 2 intersect with it. Nevertheless it is clear that an original gap existed in the facade at this point and that it corresponds with a gap in the outer circle of Phase 1. There is some suggestion of a double row of timber uprights passing through this gap, but in view of the subsequent disturbance this is not certain. What does seem certain is that the Southern Circle originated as four concentric circles of slender uprights which were shielded from the SE by a fa9ade. The entrance through this faGade points in the general direction of the main causeway but is not aligned exactly upon it. A small quantity of Grooved Ware and Beaker sherds were in post-holes of this Phase.
  Phase 2A. The four circles of Phase 1 were replaced by a larger structure represented by a series of five concentric circles of more massive posts. These do not radiate from a common centre and have localized deviations from true circle alignments. The plan of this phase is complicated by the ramps of the post-holes which interlock and sometimes intersect. Although in the latter case a local building sequence could be determined there is no reason to extend this sequence to the whole structure as a certain amount of ramp intersection would have occurred naturally when the circles were constructed. In every case the ramps were deliberately filled with rammed chalk which was frequently found to rest on a thin humic layer. This suggests that the ramps were exposed for a while before they were levelled off.
  A feature which appears for the first time in Phase 2A is the use of chalk blocks for packing the posts. The preservation of the ground surface of the time was such that in the course of the excavation the packing blocks were found still to project above the level of the natural chalk, whereas on a normal ploughed site they would long since have been destroyed. In some cases the chalk blocks retained in plan the impression of the post they had supported. The lumps of chalk used for packing were large and fresh: one lump had preserved the marks of an antler pick on its surface, and it seems unlikely that such material could have been derived from anywhere but the deep levels in the enclosure ditch.
  In addition to the packing of chalk blocks in the actual post-holes, the deliberate infilling of the ramps was carried to much greater lengths in the SE sector of circles 1 and 2 and around the east and SE circuit of circles 3 and 4. In the former area the rammed chalk filling the ramps was extended to cover an area some 24 X 12 ft. In the latter area the ramps and some of the post-hole packing were sealed by a 'platform' of rammed powdered chalk and chalk blocks, which also extended to cover the areas between the ramps. In the latter a thin fossil soil was preserved on the natural chalk but only a few sherds of pottery were obtained from it.
  The outer circle of Phase 2A is slightly flattened along its north—south axis and has estimated diameters of 120 ft. and 117 ft. The diameters of the post-holes range from 3 ft. to 5 ft. and their depths from 6 ft. to 8 ft. The majority are approached by ramps which in the main are aligned out from the interior. Exceptions to this rule occur in the SE sector in the vicinity of a probable entrance. Circle 2 is also slightly flattened along its north—south axis and has estimated diameters of 100 ft. and 97 ft. The diameters of the post-holes range from 4 ft. to 5 ft. and their depths from 4 ft. to 6 ft. The ramps for these post-holes are aligned outwards. Circle 3 is 76 ft. in diameter and the postholes range from 4—6 ft. in diameter with depths of from 5—8 ft. The ramps are aligned outwards. Circle 5 is slightly flattened along its north— south axis with diameters of 37 ft. and 35 ft. The post-holes average 3 ft. in diameter and are from 3 ft. to 6 ft. deep. There were no features in the central area apart from an area of burning which sealed post-hole 198 of Phase 1. In the majority of cases the 'pipe' of the decayed wooden post was clearly visible and it will be possible to provide estimates for the size of each timber upright.
  A remarkable feature was the large number of antler picks found in the packing of the post-holes—an estimated total of 400 picks in all. These had presumably been used to dig the holes and had been rammed back into the filling around the posts. A very great quantity of pottery and stone tools was recorded from the post-holes. This pottery is consistently of Grooved Ware type with an admixture of Beaker sherds. One large rim-sherd was decorated with an impressed spiral—a motif hitherto unknown in the south and best known in the Megalithic Carvings from the north and west. The flint tools include petit-tranchetderivative arrowheads, plano-convex knives and the usual complement of scrapers and retouched flakes. No flint axes were recorded and only one fragmentary axe of igneous rock. The absence of 'heavy' tool types must mean that the wooden uprights were trimmed and dressed away from the site. A few scraps of foreign stone were recorded, including two blocks of sarsen used as packing in post-hole 96. These blocks are quite heavy and one of them appears to have a dressed surface. The only human skeletal remains were a few skull fragments from post-hole 50.
  Phase 2B. A single circle of post-holes, 127 ft. in diameter, encloses the five concentric circles of Phase 2A. These post-holes were dug subsequently to those of that phase as in several cases (nos. 3, 10, 14) they cut through the ramps of the latter. The post-holes vary from 2 ft. to 2'5 in diameter and in depth from 1 ft. to 3 ft. and they do not have ramps. They tend to increase in size towards two large post-holes 6 ft. in diameter and 7 ft. deep (nos. 22 and 23) in the SE sector which appear to mark the position of an entrance into the precincts of the circle. In plan, these two post-holes and those immediately to the north of them appear to be cut through a platform of rammed chalk lumps and flinty gravel. This platform extends mainly to the SE of the entrance but a small portion of similar material occurs adjacent to post-hole 23. However the flinty gravel of this platform seals the ramp of post-hole 22 with which it must therefore be subsequent or contemporary. It is, however, surprising that the platform was not carried through the entrance gap between post-holes 22 and 23.
  This platform is therefore assigned tentatively to Phase 2B. From the surface of it was obtained a very great quantity of pottery, bone, stone tools and antler which was mainly distributed around an elongated area of ash and burnt chalk immediately to the SE of post-hole 22. The platform sealed a thin fossil soil from which a few sherds of pottery were obtained.
  It is diffcult to determine how much time elapsed between Phases 2A and 2B and the true position may be one of a gap of a few days rather than a deliberate reconstruction at a later date. On the whole the author tends to favour a very short interval owing to the unusual behaviour of the ramps of the outer circles of Phase 2A in their SE sector and an unusually wide gap associated with an inset post-hole between 83 and 85. It seems likely that these anomalies are due to the presence of an entrance in the SE sector and as the only outward signs of an entrance are post-holes 22 and 23 it follows that its erection immediately succeeded the building of the other five circles. In this case, the intersections of the post-holes of the circle of phase 2A are to be regarded as being Phase 2B circle with the ramps of the outer of local significance only—a suggestion which is supported by the intersection of post-hole 21 with the ramp of entrance post-hole 22. If this is so then Phases 2A and 2B are to be regarded as parts of a single structure 127 ft. in diameter with an entrance defined by two large post-holes in its SE sector. This entrance, like that of Phase 1, is aligned on the main enclosure causeway.
  The use of blocks of chalk for packing the posts in Phase 2A and the probability that this chalk was obtained from the enclosure ditch should indicate that these two structures are contemporary, It follows that Phase 1 with simple unramped post-holes and no chalkblock packing may antedate the enclosure ditch. It is clear, however, that no great interval separated Phases 1 and 2A as the latter was built along the alignments of the former.
  The Palisade Trench: A palisade trench of late Iron Age date cuts across the southern sector of the circle. It is continuous save for one deliberate gap but was much destroyed by erosion in its eastern sector. It is not associated with any structures but it may have enclosed a considerable area of the north side of the combe if a much eroded linear feature at the extreme north end of the excavation represents its ploughed-out remains. A group of pits and a cluster of post-holes to the north of the northern circle are also to be associated with this phase on the basis of the pottery.
  The Hut: A hut floor was recorded to the NE of the timber circles and consists of an oval area 43•5 x 37 ft., surrounded by stake-holes and with its northern end terraced into the slope of the hill. The stake-holes are missing in the NE and NW sectors of the circuit and may have been ploughed away. Abundant domestic debris consisting of pottery, bone and stone tools was found in the centre of the hut floor in a black, ashy deposit. In its SW sector the line of stake-holes intersects with the outer ring of the timber circle. Unfortunately, in no case do post-holes and stake-holes coincide and so their relative age cannot be ascertained. It seems clear, however, that the hut must either antedate or postdate Phase 2B of the timber circle as the two structures cannot be contemporary. *
  The occurrence of an apparently purely domestic structure within the confines of a ceremonial enclosure is of some interest. It is just possible that the hut may postdate the sanctity of the enclosure but a decision on this must await a full ceramic study and the arrival of radiocarbon determinations. It is clear from the great quantity of pottery, stone tools and bone found in the area of the southern circle that human debris was not removed from the site as has been suggested at Avebury.
THE NORTHERN CIRCLE (PL. Ilia, FIG. 2) Considerable erosion as a result of ploughing and normal weathering processes had taken place on the northern crest of the combe and only the bases of the post-holes had survived in the case of the Northern Circle and its attendant structures, This circle, similar in structure to the Southern Circle but on a smaller scale, was located on the northern crest of the combe. Well over half the post-holes were excavated, the remainder lie to the east of the threatened area. The post-holes appear to represent a two-phase structure consisting of a double timber circle, an avenue, and in the case of Phase 2, a faqade.
  Phase 1. The structures of Phase 1 are ephemeral owing to the erosion referred to above and consist of an outer circle of which
  * Later reconsideration of the evidence suggests that this structure is most probably a midden and not a roofed building.
four post-holes survive and an inner circle represented by five post-holes. The estimated diameters of these circles are 90 ft. and 62 ft. respectively but it should be stressed that the post-holes do not exceed 4 in. in depth. The outer circle is approached from the south by an avenue of post-holes of which only eight have survived the centuries of ploughing—four irregularly spaced along each alignment. This largely conjectural avenue is ft. wide and has a known length of 95 ft. but its original extent is unknown.
  Phase 2. The circles of Phase 1 were replaced by two concentric circles, smaller in diameter but consisting of larger timbers, and the avenue was succeeded by another along a different alignment. In addition a fagade of elosely set timber posts was built across the avenue. The outer circle has an estimated diameter of 48 ft. and consists of post-holes ranging in diameter from ft to 3 ft. and from to ft. deep. The inner circle consists of four large ramped post-holes averaging 4 ft. deep and has an estimated diameter of 21•5 ft. These circles are approached from the south by an avenue represented by a double row of post-holes which pass through a fagade of closely set postsockets set 55 ft. from the outer circle of Phase 2. The eastern half of the fa$ade has been badly damaged by ploughing but the western half is well preserved and, assuming that the avenue is central to it, one can suggest that its original length was some 60 ft. and that it was straight in its central portion with its terminals pointing in towards the circle. The average width of the avenue is ft. but where it passes through a gap in the fagade it broadens to 10 ft. It continues through the faqade towards the circles for a distance of 35 ft. but cannot be traced closer to the latter than 20 ft. In the centre of the avenue, at what must be called the entrance through the fagade, is a single post-hole which may represent the siting of a gate. It appears from the closely set post-holes of the fa$ade that it provided a clear demarcation line between the area to the south of it and the space immediately to the north in front of the circle. The only access through this barrier was by means of an avenue of timber uprights which was closed by a gate at the point where it crossed the facade. A small quantity of pottery, bone, antler and stone tools was found in the post-holes for the Phase 2 circles. The pottery includes sherds of a long-necked Beaker and Grooved Ware.
CONCLUSION
BIBLIOGRAPHYConsiderable labour must have been expended in excavating an enclosure ditch of the Durrington dimensions (which has a total length of 1,460 yds.), transporting the chalk out of its depths and across a berm 90 ft. wide to pile up a bank over 100 ft. across. Such an undertaking implies a large labour force belonging to a society whose beliefs necessitated the building of enclosures on this scale, and who could afford to deflect labour from the necessities of food production in order to provide for the non-material aspects of their existence. The timber structures found in the interior have clear analogies with those at Woodhenge itself, the Sanctuary, Arminghall and Great Bleasdale, but possibly of greater value are the quantities of domestic debris found in the excavations and the information that will thus be gained concerning the material culture and domestic economy of the time. Finally, these results were obtained in the excavation of an arbitrary strip across the eastern half of the interior and it is diffcult to believe that similar timber structures do not occur within the enclosure ditch.
  
CRAWFORD, O. G. S. 1929. 'Durrington Walls', ANTIQUITY, 49—59.
HOARE, R. C. 1812. Ancient Wiltshire, Vol. I.
PIGGOTT, S. 1959. 'The Radiocarbon Date from Durrington Walls', ANTIQUITY, 289—90.
STONE, J. F. S., PIGcorr, S. and BOOTH, A. St J. 1954. 'Durrington Walls, Wiltshire: Recent excavations at a ceremonial site of the early second millennium B.C.', Ant. ff., xxxrv, 155—77.
  

DURRINGTON WALLS
(a) General view of the excavation from the north. (b) The southern circle at the completion of the excavation with Woodhenge to the south
See pp. 20—6]
  

  
?9?0 ?BBS'
111 LV"Id

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  
ANTIQUITY
  
DURRINGTON WALLS: A CEREMONIAL ENCLOSURE
  
21
  
21
  
DURRINGTON WALLS: A CEREMONIAL ENCLOSURE
  
21
  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  
