463
Review articles
Eternal stones: Stonehenge completed
ALASDAIR WHYITLE*
  
ROSAMUND M.J. CLEAL, K.E. WALKER & R. MONTAGUE. Stonehenge in its landscape: twentieth-century excavations. (Archaeological report 10,) xv + 618 pages. 26 colour plates, 297 illustrations, 4 plan inserts, 69 tables. 1995. London: English Heritage; 1-85074605-2 hardback 50.
Looking back, there were three Ages. In the First Age, diverse Great Men came and observed, and some even dug in the ground. There were an Architect sent by the King, Antiquaries, a Rich Man, Painters, a Mining Geologist, and at the end a Colonel who Worked by Himself. Their accounts were scattered and brief. In the Second Age, Real Archaeologists visited several times, their excavations at the centre small but precise. They left one oracular text, but this was largely an Oral Tradition which gave little importance to Publication of Detail. In the Third Age, the pace quickened. There were Excavations and Survey round and about, and finally Three Women of Wessex were brought together to complete The Task. For two years they laboured, and Paper was brought in Great Rolls from Belgium (not, it is thought, by ice sheets), and in the end It Was Done: the Stonehenge report,
  At last! Thanks to English Heritage, who commissioned it via Wessex Archaeology, and to Ros Cleal, Karen Walker & Rebecca Montague, who wrote it, assisted by numerous others including Julie Gardiner and Michael Allen, we have as full and monumental a report on the 20th-century excavations at Stonehenge as could have been hoped for. The report revives the work of Gowland and Hawley, applies artifical resuscitation to the excavations of Atkinson and Piggott, draws on the results of the recent Stonehenge Environs Project led by Julian Richards and on work by others such as Evans and Pitts in order to put the monument in context, and presents a series of new radiocarbon dates, which are at the heart of an important restatement of the chronology of the monument. Taken alongside Christopher Chippindale's history of interpretation of the monument (Chippindale 1993), this is indeed Stonehenge complete. It is a massive achievement.
  The aims of the report are threefold: to bring together an archive of all 20th-century work at the site, preferring to include any relevant documentation rather than leave it out; to present the sequence of development at the monument in a new chronology, backed by new radiocarbon dates on carefully chosen and evaluated samples; and to relate the site to its local landscape. The successes of the report are extensive and impressive, in each of these fields. The report is structured by a narrative of the development of the monument, but it is convenient here to take each element separately.
  Here one can find, at last, detailed and more-orless definitive presentations of all the available evidence for the features of the site: the ditch, segment by segment, Aubrey Holes, Avenue and other elements of the periphery, interior post-holes, and the still confusing mass of stone-holes and other features at the centre. There are extensive illustrations, cleverly presented: the ditch segments for example being shown by a combination on the same pages of sections at various scales, plans and Hawley photographs. In its own right, this sets a new standard of site presentation. The central stone-hole cuttings are shown in part with the aid of colour. Given the lack of detail published from earlier excavations, the policy of total inclusion was undoubtedly the right one. But do not expect an easy read as a result. The recording extends partially to the vertical dimensions of the site, with photos of the stones and some elevations, prepared as long ago as 1919. This is useful but incomplete, as I found in preparing a paper for the recent Royal Society conference on Stonehenge; plans are afoot for a full coverage of the neglected verticality of the monument. There are also detailed finds reports. These are illuminating, Beaker pottery from phased contexts, for example, consists of single sherds from not more than six vessels. Since their contexts range from Q Hole 5 and upper fills of sarsen stoneholes to the primary fill of Z Hole 16, their usefulness as chronological markers of the sequence of construction cannot be great.
* School of History & Archaeology, University of Wales, PO Box 909, Cardiff CFI 3XLJ, Wales.
ANTIQUITY 70 (1996): 463-5  The great mass of detail that the report generates is held within a narrative of monument and landscape development. The report retains three phases but defines them differently to Atkinson (1956; 1979). As each phase is introduced, there are neat summaries of suggested date span, plan and main features (pp. 62, 115, 167). In brief, in Phase 1, c. 2950-2900 BC, ditch, inner bank and outer counterscarp bank
464
were constructed, along with the Aubrey Holes, envisaged as a ring of posts. Not only does the segmented form of the ditch recall earlier causewayed enclosures, but there were some deposits of animal bones on the base of the ditch, including in the terminals of its segments, and radiocarbon dating shows the re-use of some older material. Primary fill accumulated in the ditch, and an organic layer formed over it. Phase 2, labelled 'a change of emphasis', belonged between 2900 and 2400 BC. During it, secondary ditch fill accumulated, some of it deliberately deposited as clean chalk backfill. Post settings within the earthwork are assigned to this phase, from the centre, towards the southern entrance and in the northeast entrance. Towards the end of the phase, cremations were put in the partially filled Aubrey Holes and the upper ditch, and on and just inside the inner bank. Phase 3, labelled merely 'the stone monument', spanned c. 2550—1600 BC. In 3i, bluestones were set up in the Q and R Holes and then dismantled. In 3ii, the sarsen circle and trilithons were constructed, perhaps coeval with another bluestone setting which included bluestone trilithons (3iii). Rearranged bluestones were then set in a circle and oval (3iv), the oval later rearranged to form a bluestone horseshoe (3v), The last act was the digging of the Y and Z Holes (3vi) to take stones, presumed as bluestones, but these were left unfilled. There is another short chapter on the assimilation of the monument and post-Bronze Age 'use and abuse'.
  Parts of this sequence represent fundamental changes in our understanding of the monument. The beginning of the earthwork belongs, as already anticipated by Richard Bradley (1991), to the middle of the Neolithic; Flagstones, Dorchester, can also be seen as a transitional enclosure, Deposits of animal bone, including the re-use of old material, echo earlier practice. But the circular form of Stonehenge 1 presages the greater formality of those later enclosures which we inadequately label as 'henges'. The relative sequence of the lithic phases is essentially Atkinsonian, though Cleal is at pains to point out that there is no need to see the Q and R Holes as a symmetrical or circular setting. The great change comes in the absolute date for Phase 3ii. At face value, the radiocarbon dates take the sarsen ring and trilithon horseshoe out of the Early Bronze Age and back into the Late Neolithic, somewhere around 2500 BC or soon after. This is fundamental for interpretation of the possible meanings of the site (of which more below). The radiocarbon dating programme has been accompanied by a welcome critical approach, sufficient for example to reject two previous dates and one recent date for the Q and R Holes. What of Phase 3ii ? The youngest determination (BM-46, 2480—1680 BC) is from a previous campaign of dating, and has a large standard deviation. The other three offer a wide span between c. 2800 and 2200 BC (UB-3821, 26552485 BC; OxA-4840, 2850-2400 BC; and OxA-4839, 2470—2200 BC), but with standard deviations no larger than 45 years. Assuming that residual material is not being used, a possibility to which the team of Bayliss, McCormac, Housley and Ramsey is alert, the shift in time is considerable. Subsequent rearrangements of the stone monument must have unfolded over a long period of time.
  Despite all the evidence assembled in the report, other parts of the new sequence must remain open to doubt. It might have been wiser to adopt a more flexible approach to the details of Phases 1 and 2 here; the comprehensive scheme offered reads like an Atkinsonian legacy. Is there compelling evidence, for example, to deny the possibility that the Aubrey Holes might have pre-dated the bank and ditch? Or have followed them? Whether the Aubrey Holes originally held posts remains open to question. The issue is fairly debated (pp. 102—7), but the final decision to plump for posts seems rather arbitrary. There is no easy solution to the problem of where the interior timber settings belong. Why not to Phase 1? As the report convincingly shows, there are no simple circles to be derived from the plan, and as Julian Richards and Mark Whitby indicated at the Royal Society conference, it cannot be excluded that some of the central timber features were to do with the setting up of stones.
  The third theme of landscape context is well presented by Michael Allen, from the Mesolithic through to the Bronze Age and beyond. Much less of this aspect represents new or unpublished information (though note sampling of the pre-bank soil), a lot being taken from the preceding Stonehenge Environs Project (Richards 1990). The environmental discussion in chaper 10 ('Stonehenge in its landscape') also tends to exaggerate the extent of our knowledge of the physical environment, which here, as indeed around Avebury and Dorchester, and in Cranborne Chase, remains extremely patchy. It seems to fly in the face of the last 10 years of Neolithic debate to expect a more sedentary population and an intensified economy to underpin the phase of lithic constructions ('An economy to support the stones?', p. 484). But there are nice additions, including the views out from the site complete with finds assemblages from barrows (figures 21—3), and the intriguing possibility that a long stretch (still fully to be traced at its ends) of stout palisade to the north of the monument could be of Late Neolithic date. If volunteers are wanted to investigate this, you read my bid here first!
  It may seem a little churlish, when there is so much to be grateful for, to highlight some niggles in the presentation. Figure layouts, already noted, and other diagrams, including the radiocarbon analyses, set high standards, but proof-reading has not been good in some parts. The opening summaries get the volume off to a bad start in this regard, and there are odd phrasings and numerous small errors in captions and elsewhere, which probably betray haste in the final stages before publication. I guess that we should probably exonerate the authors and editors, and blame the schedule set by a system impatient to deliver for political reasons, but it is an unfortunate blemish in a flagship publication. The bibliography lacks indentation, and is very hard to use.
  ft was not a primary aim of the report to offer extensive new interpretation, though reassessment of the monument in its national and international setting was one of the objectives of English Heritage in commissioning the project (p. 2). The treatment in chapter 10 is contextual and based again on the narrative of site and local landscape development. The result is effective but the tone is muted. This is a pity. There is so much more to say.
  On the level of structural development alone, the very uncertainty of phases 1—2 must be significant in terms of time-scale, planning and spiritual ownership. Should we be thinking of a cycle of ritual both through time and across the local and regional space ? If phase 3 has shifted from isolation in the Early Bronze Age to join the wider sacred geography of the Late Neolithic, this realignment needs to be made much of. The often remarked similarity between the stone monument and circular timber structures, whether roofed or not, gets greater immediacy; the contemporary is made eternal in stone. Is it also put beyond dispute in public time (cf. Bradley 1991; Gosden 1994), or does it present the Neolithic moral community at its most united and integrated? The wider debate about the nature of Late Neolithic society will rumble on. The report supplies ammunition, but takes little part in the engagement.
  It is hard to keep the two- and three-dimensional layout of the monument out of interpretation. If phase 3 is Late Neolithic, what beautiful ideas it incorporates. The contemporary timber shrine is translated into stone, and opened on one axis to receive the rays of the midsummer sun down what Clive Ruggles has called the solar corridor of the Avenue and en-
References
ATKINSON, R.J.C. 1956. Stonehenge. London: Penguin.
1979. Stonehenge. Revised edition. London: Penguin.
BENDER, B. 1992. Theorising landscapes, and the prehistoric landscapes of Stonehenge, Man 27: 735—55.
BRADLEY, R. 1991. Ritual, time and history, World Archaeology 23: 209-19.
465
trance; always over the shoulder is the opposed alignment of the midwinter sunset.
  On another level, Barbara Bender has explored some of the textures of meaning built into the monument in the use and choice of materials (Bender 1992; not referenced in the report), and this approach can be expanded. I think that the site in its main phase of lithic monumentality presented many ideas, including: reference to the past; a symbolism of natural and old opposed to cultural and recent; a sense of bodily orientation and movement involving left and right; a hierarchy of spirits; belief in renewal and rebirth; a fixing of the ancestral order for all time; and a celebration of the moral community. I want to connect Stonehenge phase 3 to goings-on elsewhere in Wessex, and to bring the earth symbolism of Silbury Hill into the same frame as the stepped verticality of the phase 3 settings. Tim Darvill at the Royal Society conference began to explore some of the possible cosmologies inscribed into the local landscape through the history of the site. The publication of that conference (in the Proceedings of the British Academy) will make a start in wider interpretation, and anyone else can now work up their own ideas, from the firm base provided by this report, but it would have been good to see more attempted in the volume itself. Note, too, that the conference heard convincing rejection by geologist C.P. Green and glaciologist J. Scourse of the hypothesis of glacial transport of the bluestones to Wessex. Here, then, is another item for the interpretative agenda.
  The report will not be the end of the story. Connected with its laudable campaign to re-route roads and re-present the site and its setting, English Heritage has begun publicly to debate an imaginative programme of further research at the site and roundabout, including full recording of the uprights, surgical incisions within the monument, and re-opening of 19th-century barrow cuttings. In these ways and others, the site and its surrounds, and therefore also inescapably from now on this fundamental report, will remain in the thick of debate about change from the Late Neolithic to the Early Bronze Age.
CHIPPINDALE, C. 1993. Stonehenge cornplete. 2nd edition. London: Thames & Hudson.
GOSDEN, C. 1994. Social being and time. Oxford: Blackwell.
RICHARDS, J. 1990. The Stonehenge environs project. London: English Heritage.
REVIEW
  
REVIEW
  
REVIEW
  
