REVIEWS
  
Garlake has struck a significant blow for African history and the dispassionate study of the African past. BRIAN M. FAGAN
Fred Hoyle: From Stonehenge to modern cosmology. San Francisco and Reading: W. H. Freeman, 1973. 96 pp., 36 figs. (1 pullout). $4-95 {,2.10.
Even a general reader will surely find much of interest in the four chapters of this little book, which comprises an illustrated and amplified text of a series of lectures given by Professor Hoyle in the USA in 1971. For example the last two chapters, on cosmology, will afford any receptive reader a taste of the excitement generated by some of the perplexing discoveries that astronomers have made recently, though it should perhaps be said that the interpretations on offer are very much Hoyle's own. Equally individual and provocative is the content of the first chapter, on science and society, but it is the second chapter, on Stonehenge, to which most readers of ANTIQUITY will wish to turn first.
  As we learn from this quite personal account, Hoyle's interest in the astronomical problems associated with Stonehenge was inspired, through the medium of the Editor of ANTIQUITY, by the work of Professor G. S. Hawkins, and on reading Hawkins's book Stonehenge decoded, Hoyle recognized that its main thesis seemed 'to have a genuine ring of truth'. He significantly improved certain of Hawkins's suggestions in a letter to Nature, which is reproduced in this book, and wrote an extended account of the subject, including details of the relevant mathematical formulae, in this journal (ANTIQUITY, 1966, 262—76).
  Much of the second chapter of this book is a beautifully clear and concise introduction to the astronomical aspects of Stonehenge and to Hoyle's own views on the subject. There is scarcely a line of mathematics to deter the reader and, although it is necessarily a little technical in a few places, the material is logically arranged and presented in that readable style which makes all Professor Hoyle's factual books so engrossing.
  For all that, there is little that is new beyond some curious but speculative suggestions as to how the supposed megalithic astronomers counted. To those inclined to scepticism, and such people are not in short supply, despite the support for Hawkins's theories from one of the world's most distinguished astronomers, details of this kind mean little when placed beside the question, 'Where is the evidence to persuade me, as a reasonable person, to accept the astronomical theory ? ' Such critics will find little to satisfy them in Hoyle's new book, beyond certain plain statements of opinion which, though reasoned qualitatively in places, are hardly convincing. As an example, Hoyle was impressed by the discovery that the station-stone rectangle would enjoy its astronomical properties only at a latitude close to that of Stonehenge : he 'found it impossible to dismiss this property as a mere coincidence'.
  One exception to these qualitative considerations, being susceptible to statistical test, concerns the fact, discovered by Hawkins and essentially confirmed by Hoyle, that the alignments deviate slightly from the directions expected on the basis of the astronomical theory. Hoyle proposed an explanation in his letter to Nature and says that, on this basis, the sign of the error should be the same as that of the declination. Unfortunately, his argument here is incorrect, for the rule should be that the sign of the error is the same as that of the declination except at what Professor Thom, in his book Megalithic lunar observatories, calls the 'minor standstill', when the signs should be opposite. When Hoyle's calculation is corrected it is found that this piece of support for the astronomical theories, which is the only reasonably unequivocal statistical test to have been performed on the data from Stonehenge, loses most of its weight.
  Perhaps the lesson of such considerations as these is that it is time to shift effort and emphasis away from the further elaboration of the theories, towards the fundamental problem of replying satisfactorily to the doubts of those reasonable sceptics who, while recognizing that many facts about Stonehenge fit well with the astronomical hypothesis, still question its statistical significance. DOUGLAS C. HEGGIE
G. E. R. Lloyd: Greek science after Aristotle. London: Chatto & Windus, 1973. 189 pp. ß1.25.
This excellent little book is a continuation of Dr Lloyd's Early Greek science : Thales to Aristotle. It brings the story down to the Roman Empire and beyond, concentrating mainly on the hellcnistic period (particularly the two
  
331
