NOTES AND NEWS
  
horse a grip of the ground under any conditions is the natural conformation of the sole and especially of the frog in the middle of it. If the shoe is not so applied that the frcg when the foot strikes the ground is in contact with the surface, no amount of 'rough shoeing' will prevent it slipping.
  The shoe with high calkins (Stollen) under the heels is still being forged and fitted in the general AlpinelUpper Danube area. These Mr Charles Green writes:
Mr Denes addendum to my original 'note' is full of interest but, of course, I dicl not intend a full survey of farriery. I merely expressed my view that the earliest form of artificial protection for the hoof was a row of fiddle-key nails held firmly in position by a thin strip of metal, and that this protection served the dual purpose of providing a non-slip device and a hard-wearing metal contact-surface.
  He enlarges on the special needs of the medieval packhorse. These needs may well have been the cause of the introduction of the true 'medieval' shoe which gradually replaced the lighter lobate form. It is doubtful if the heavy shoe could have been used with a true fiddle-key nail and 1 incline to the view that the two main types persisted side by side for many years, until the heavier true shoe finally superseded its older rival. I did not attempt a full survey of its survival; the Luttrell Psalter simply provided convenient evidence that the projecting nail was still in use after the introduction of the heavier shoe. But the limitations calkins when new are over an inch long and give the hoof a 'stiletto heel' posture of which most British veterinary surgeons would disapprove. In some models this is 'corrected' by a toecalkin which brings the foot level, but it is equally undesirable as it keeps the frog, one of whose functions is as a shock-absorber to prevent concussion of the foot and eventual ostosis of the pedal bones and strains on the tendons, from making contact with the ground.
of these illustrations do not enable us to decide which type of shoe was affxed. They are evidence merely of projecting nails. Our archaeological record gives us fairly reliable evidence for the introduction of each shoetype, but it is much harder—in fact, probably impossible—to demonstrate the date to which each survived in use.
Further Radiocarbon Dates for Stonehenge  Elsewhere (Antiquaries Journal, XXXIX, 80) I have pointed out that no horseman would have ridden on a hard-paved Roman road if a suitable grass-verge was available; paved roads were for marching infantrymen, pedestrians and draught animals. It is diffcult to be sure, but it is likely enough that ridden horses were at that time more numerous than draught animals. Mr Dent is, of course, quite right about the relative size of animals of the two periods, but as most of the medieval lobate shoes known to us are larger than the average Roman shoe, the size may sometimes give help in attributing a doubtfully dated shoe to its proper period.
  
Three new dates for Stonehenge have recently been determined by Isotopes, Inc., from antler specimens. Two of these were made possible through the generosity of Mr R. S. Newall.
  The earliest (1-2328, 2180 B.C. ± 105) refers to an antler pick found in 1954 in the primary silt of the ditch, 3 in. above the bottom, at a point west of the entrance of the earthwork where the ditch was a little over 6 ft. in depth. This effectively dates the construction of the ditch, and by inference the •rest of Stonehenge I, including the Aubrey Holes.
  This new date is not statistically distinguishable from the date of 1848 B.C. ± 275 for charcoal excavated from Aubrey Hole 32 in 1950 [1]; but it is to be preferred because of its smaller standard error. The charcoal provides in any case only a terminus ante quem for the digging of the Aubrey Holes, since it was associated with a cremation in a secondary disturbance of the primary filling of the hole.
  The second new date (1-2384, 1620 B.C. ± 110) was obtained from the tine of an antler pick, found in 1956 on the bottom of an
  
63
ANTIQUITY
  
incomplete R Hole on the west-south-west side of the site, which appears to have been the last of this series to be dug before the double bluestone circle of period Il was abandoned unfinished [2]. This date is not statistically distinguishable from the date of 1720 B.C. ± 150 for an antler pick found in 1958 in the erection-ramp of stone 56 [3]; but the means of these two determinations are reversed from their expected order. The abandonment of Stonehenge Il presumably preceded, even if by a short interval only, the erection of the trilithons of period IlIa. We can still use both dates, however, to conclude that the most probable date for the Stonehenge Il /Illa transition lies in the 17th century B.C.
  The third new date (1-2445, 1240 B.C. ± 105) refers to one of five antlers found in 1923 on the bottom of Y Hole 30 [4], generously made available by the Salisbury Museum. Since these antlers would very soon have become covered by chalk silt, their date of deposition must effectiv•ely be that of the digging of the Y and Z Holes, and therefore by inference that of the Stonehenge 111b /lllc transition.
NOTESR. J. C. ATKINSON
  
  [1] R. J. C. Atkinson, et al., Antiquaries Journal, xxxll, 1952, 14—20.
  [2] R. J. C. Atkinson, Stonehenge (Pelican, 1960),
  [3] ANTIQUITY, xxxlll, 1959, 239; S. Piggott, New Scientist, 30th July 1959, 133.
Radiocarbon Dates from Corfu, Greece  [4] W. Hawley, Antiquaries Journal, v, 1925, 37-8 and fig. 2 (Hole Y).
  
Mr Augustus Sordinas of Harvard University has sent us this note on the radiocarbon dating of an Early Neolithic site in Corfu, where he was engaged in fieldwork during 1964—6 on a Harvard Travelling Fellowship. The impressed ware was found at Sidari early in 1966, and the author is grateful to Dr Hugh Hencken for obtaining a special grant through the Milton Fund for the C-14 dates.
Two carbon-14 dates have just been obtained from two Early Neolithic levels at the site of Sidari on the north-west tip of Corfu
The earliest date was from ashes in the lower level contai.ning plain and incised wares resembling the patterns from Molfetta [2]. The date is 5720 ± 120 B.C. (GXO-771).
  A somewhat later date was obtained from ashes with carbon fragments from a level 1 m. above the earlier stratum, and containing impressed ware similar to that from Stratum Ill of Crvena Stijena [3] and Stratum Ill of Zelena Pecina [4]. The date here is 5390 ± 180 B.C. (GXO-772). These dates are based on the half-life of 5570 years.
NOTES  The stratigraphic sequence is in the process of being worked out.
  
  [1] Sordinas, 'Proistorikö Érevna Stén Kérkyra Kata to 1965' (English summary), Kerkyraikå Chronikå, 11, 1966, 145—8, figs. 3, 4.
  [2] Mayer, Molfetta und Matera (1924), table VI, 16.
  [3] A. Benac, 'Crvena Stijena-1955 (i—v)', Glasnik,
n.s. Xll, 1957, pl. VI, 4.
The Mohenjo-daro Floods—Further Notes  [4] A. Benac, 'Zelena Pecina', ibid., figs. e, p. 73 ; 1/2, p. 75 ; pl. x, 4, 6. Also comparable with Grotta delle Mura in Conaggia Castiglioni (Riv. Sc. Preistoriche, 1963, fig. 7, 1).
  
During a recent all-too-brief visit to Antibes as the guest of Professor Jean-Marie Casal l had to face some fairly searching questioning from him about my recent paper in this journal, 'The Mohenjo-daro Floods' (1965, 196).
  As the main point that worried Professor Casal has possibly worried others also, may I please beg the hospitality of a little space in which to give an answer and explanation. Both the question and the answer are, apart from any
  
64
