REVIEW	987

tions of its denizens to our own (see, for example, Hill 1989; Parker Pearson forthcoming).
  This is a volume of almost encyclopaedic proportions and there should be something in it for most students of the Bronze and Iron Ages. It would be a shame to stress the weaknesses on the theoretical side when it offers an accessible guide to the vast body of material now available from the different regions of Europe. After reading it, I was even more impressed by the extraordinary diversity of regional developments, from the broch complexes of northern Scotland, to the longhouse villages and hamlets of Scandinavia, to the oppida of central Europe. In many ways these regional trajectories have defied collective description within this single narrative.
                 MIKE PARKER PEARSON Department of Archaeology and Prehistory University of Sheffield
References
CHAMPION, T.C. 1987. The European Iron Age: assessing the state of the art, Scottish Archaeological Review 4: 98-107.
FIZPATRiCK, A.P. 1991. 'Celtic (Iron Age) Religion' — traditional and timeless? Scottish Archaeological Review 8: 123-9.
HILL, J.D 1989. Re-thinking the Iron Age, Scottish Archaeological Review 6: 16—24.
MERREMAN, N. 1987. Value and motivation in prehistory: the evidence for 'Celtic' spirit, in I. Hodder (ed.), The archaeology of contextual meanings: 111—16. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
PARKER PEARSON, M. Forthcoming. Food, fertility and front doors in the first millennium BC. in T. Champion & J. Collis (ed.), The British Iron Age: recent trends. Sheffield: JR. Collis Publications.

G. T. MEADEN. The Stonehenge solution. 224 pages, 72 illustrations, 4 Inaps, 8 plans, 20 diagrams, 6 tables. 1992. London: Souvenir Press; ISBN hardback ElB.99.
Like its price this book ig an oddity. It makes three major claims: that there was a pan-European Great Goddess; that cursuses were replicas of tornado paths; and that the Heel Stone at Stonehenge was a phallus whose seminal midsummer shadow extended onto the Goddess Stone inside the womb of Stonehenge. Each hypothesis is questionable, reminding onc of Jacquetta Hawkes' dictum that every age has the Stonehenge it deserves — or desires.
  Two of the ideas in this attractively produced book can be dealt with briefly. That there was a Neolithic cult of a female deity or protectress is arguable although she remains amorphous. That in megalithic art her sexual attributes were symbolized by triangles, lozenges and spirals is possible although specialists in Late Neolithic pottery may be startled to learn that the linear incisions in Grooved Ware were formalized vulvas (pp. 29—32). Similarly, in the Gavr'inis passage-tomb the decorated 'panels are artistic vulvar representations labia, vulva, clitoris' (p, 39). Perhaps.
  The second section of the book states that people, awed by the destructive power of tornados, constructed the commemorative banks of cursuses along the sides of the whirlwinds' rectangular devastation. Life must have been tempestuous at Rudston with three or four cursuses. The idea is interesting and meteorologically feasible but the author should have considered the problem of why tornados were restricted to parts of Britain, never affecting the cursus-free northeast of Ireland, the Boyne Valley or the whole of Brittany.
  It is theorized that centuries later other capricious weather led to Stonehenge I being reverently laid out around the perimeter of a tornadic corn-circle (p. 141). As this is agriculturally in direct contradiction to the 1978 excavators' statement that 'There was no evidence of ploughing in the pre-henge soil grassland is indicated' (Evans 1983: 26), the presence of corn in a ring must be doubted even as a result of a Neolithic hoax.
  The climax of the book comes with the author's contention that the Heel Stone was a phallic symbol. Meaden, the publisher's flier claims, 'has arrived at a dramatic, loéical — and very sexy — solution to the mystery of Stonehenge'. In this he follows Clyde Franklin Reed's Stonehenge of Salisbury Plain (1965), in which the ring was 'the first accurate sex machine and it still works', the 56 Aubrey Holes symbolizing the menstrual cycle, 2 x 28 days for each ovary, with the Heel Stone being the penis.
  The erection of the Heel Stone is the major point of issue in The Stonehenge solution. This outlying pillar, one of many Devil's 'quoits' in Britain thrown or 'coyted' by Satan at ofTending persons or places is said by Meaden to have cast a midsumrner morning masculine shadow into [he womb of Stonehenge, worrning into the vulva of the trilithon horseshoe where it creeps up to tho Goddess of the Altar Stone 'and consummates the ritual marriage' (p. 165).
  The idea is stimulating but ill-conceived. The tumescent shadow of the 'quoit' would have been frustrated by the higher Slaughter Stone at the northeast entrance, a broad, tooled slab, now prostrate, but positioned exactly between the Heel and the Altar. William Cunnington Ill observed that when the stone was upright 'it must have entirely concealed the 'gnomon" [the Heel] from persons standing in front of the "altar"' (Long 1876: 56). Barclay (1895: 42) recognized the same phenomenon.
988	REVIEW  To overcome this barrier Meaden argues (p. 181) that the stone was deliberately toppled in antiquity, but he seems mistaken. A sketch of Stonehenge dated AD 1575 shows the Slaughter Stone and a partner standing, straddling the axis of Stonehenge Ill (Bakker 1979: 109; Atkinson 1979: 31), The drawing in Camden (1695: 95) explicitly displays the pair as vertical. Both Inigo Jones in 1620 and John Aubrey in 1666 recorded that the portals were upright.
  In consequence, when the solstitial sun rose in 2000 BC and passed behind the Heel Stone, the shadow from the 'quoit' would slide up to the Slaughter Stone and then be blocked, a prehistoric example of quoitus interruptus. The contention that the Heel Stone was a male sexual symbo[ must be regarded as a fallacy.
  The Stonehenge solution is an over-confident fantasia offering some acceptable archaeology and some provocative ideas but with a thesis that tempts but does not overcome because the evidence lacks penetration. As John Aubrey observed of Inigo Jones' Stone-Heng (1655), 'he framed the monument to his own Hypothesis, which is much differing from the Thing itself'.
AUBREY BURL
References
ATKINSON, R.J .C. 1979. Stonehenge. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
BAKKER, J.A. 1979. Lucas de Heere's Stonehenge, Antiquity 53: 107-11.
BARCLAY, E. 1895. Stonehenge and its earth-works. London:
D. Nutt.
CAMDEN, W. 1695. Britannia. London: Swalle & Churchill.
EVANS, J.C. et a}. 1983. Stonehenge — the environment .
Wiltshire Archaeological and Natural History Magazine
LONG, W. 1876. Stonehenge and its barrows, Wiltshire Archaeological and Natural History Magazine 16:
I —244.

NICHOLAS HIGHAM. Rome, Britain and the AngloSaxons. (The Archaeology of Change). 263 pages, 51 figures. 1992. London: Seaby; ISBN 1-85264-022-7 paperback E 18.50.
This is a very welcome book. It provides the substance behind the outline of the case already presented for the demotion of the Anglo-Saxon migration from mass folk movement to political takeover by 'a few thrusting chiefs' (Hodges 1989). A mass of literature has been assimilated and synthesized to give, in the final chapter, an elegant and persuasive picture of both the Roman and Germanic impact on Britain, showing how closely interconnected both processes in fact were. For this chapter, and the introductory historiographical chapter alone, to say nothing of the bibliography, this book should be on every student reading list. This is an impressively thorough and coherent analysis and synthesis of a considerable body of recent research, both archaeological and historical.
  The first chapter reminds us of the extent to which interpretations of the Anglo-Saxon migrations have been coloured by 19th and 20th century political ideology. Later chapters move from the Romanization of Britain to the end of Rome and its aftermath, then to different kinds of evidence for the 5th century: settlement and landscape, history and archaeology, language and place-names. Moving the boundary to the centre in this way is a very good idea, although it probably lays the author, as a medievalist, open to attack from Roman specialists. It is illuminating to look at the same time how, and to what extent, Britain became first Roman and then Anglo-Saxon. Consideration of both at once adds force to the critique of assumptions as to the equation between change in material culture, language and ethnicity.
  As well as synthesis, there are also interesting new insights, such as the interpretation of the organization behind the construction of the Wansdyke, but in a book which covers so much material there are bound to be errors, omissions and opinions violently contested by others. Notable omissions are the work by Helena Hamerow on the settlement at Mucking and by Heinrich Härke on weapon burials, both of whose conclusions have direct relevance to the theme of this book. I could find many points to query: the 'total lack of Roman goods in the great cremation cemeteries of eastern England' (p. 173), for example, or the contradiction between pp. 185 and 233 as to who were likely to have been victims of sacrifice ('servants or slaves' on p. 185 and 'the elite' on p. 233), or unSubstantiated statements such as 'the amateurishness' of Ambrosianus Aurelianus' military efforts (p. 223). The numbers of excavated burials are a notoriously unreliable basis for the calculation of population (as Higham recognizes, p. 181): the few large excavated cemeteries may be more atypical in their extensive excavation in recent years than in their original size.
  But it is more important to confront the main thesis. This line of argument is one I have often pursued myself (despite an appearance here as a traditional Germanist on p. 12). I would even add in another element, and put more stress on religion as a driving force for change, as much as political and social factors. Nevertheless, I now find myself not entirely in agreement with the main conclusion of this book.
  Firstly, I cannot accept that the communities buried in the large cremation cemeteries such as Spong Hill in Norfolk were 'élites'. In these cemeteries there were men, women, chifdren, horses, dogs and cows, all cremated and buried according to the practice common in northern Germany/southern Scandinavia. The houses at West Stow do not look to me like chiefly residences. Anglo-Saxon society was hierarchical, like both the Romano-British and Germanic societies from which it derived, and it may
