ANTIQUITY, XLI, 1967
God in the Machine
by JACQUETTA HAWKES
Since Professor Gerald Hawkins published his 1963/4 articles in Nature and his book Stonehenge Decoded, and since Professor Fred Hoyle published his 'Speculations on Stonehenge' (ANTIQUITY, 1966, 262), there has been widespread discussion of this new interpretation of the monument as an observatory. Hawkins's book had already been reviewed in these pages by Professor Atkinson (ANTIQUITY, 1966, 212). We invited several astronomers and archaeologists to comment on Hoyle's paper and some of these comments were published in the last number of this journal (1967, 91). Here Jacquetta Hawkes summarizes the Hawkins-Hoyle theories in the light of these and other comments and concludes that 'nothing of any great moment has been established by the astronomical nouveau vague flowing over Stonehenge'.
  
   VERY age has the Stonehenge it deserves—or desires. I lectured on this subject long ago. It always provoked cries of delight from a general audience when I contrasted pictures of the wildly jagged stones seen by romantic eyes with others showing the smooth stones and regular form of the Roman temple of the Tuscan order apparent to the classical vision. I ended my lecture with Stonehenge as it appeared to our scientific age— but I did not at that time dream that our greatest prehistoric monument would actually be taken over by astronomers and recognized as a celestial observatory and calculating machine.
  The obvious question is whether, because this last view of Stonehenge belongs to a scientific age supposedly concerned with objective truth, it must approximate more nearly to what Stonehenge in fact meant to its builders, or whether it might be just as much affected by contemporary interests and modes of thought as the views of the former romantics and classicists.
  The idea that Stonehenge was orientated in relation to the sun has, of course, been current since Stukeley's day, and at the beginning of this century was given what must be called a pseudo-scientific precision by Sir Norman Lockyer, then Astronomer Royal. The wanton manner in which Sir Norman chose the axis line which he then used with extreme precision in calculating the building date by means of the shift in the mid-summer sunrise has been sternly but not unfairly exposed by Richard Atkinson in his masterly Stonehenge.
  The present astronomical phase can be said to have opened in June 1961 when Professor Gerald Hawkins and his wife witnessed sunrise over the Heel Stone. Greatly stirred by the experience, he began to peer 'over and between the stones' until he 'came to feel that all of them might have been placed according to an (astronomical) master plan.' In particular he was struck by the fact that it was impossible to see through all three of the narrow openings of the surviving trilithons from any one point. This fact seemed to him to violate 'customary architectural design', and therefore to suggest that the trilithons were intended primarily to fix viewing lines.
  In order to regain the master plan, Professor Hawkins determined to put his trust not in a deus ex machina but in the machine itself. As he put it, he 'had decided that the problem at Stonehenge was worthy of a computer's attention'. Back in the U.S. the Professor and his helpers, working on small-scale published plans, recognized 165 'positions' formed by 'stones, stone holes, mounds' belonging to successive periods at Stonehenge. They then selected 120 lines between pairs of 'positions', or between the 'positions' and other points selected as being significant, such as the point between pairs of stones, and extended them both backwards and forwards on to the horizon. They observed that certain points on the horizon were indicated by more than one alignment, and that these apparently important points corresponded with the extremes of sunrise and sunset in summer and winter, and with the rising and setting of the full moon nearest to these solstices. The date chosen for the estimation of these sun and moon positions was 1500 BC.
  In October 1963 Professor Hawkins published these findings in Nature. In this article, entitled 'Stonehenge Decoded', he said that the positions of rising and setting of the sun and moon were calculated by computer before the establishment of the important alignments, but in the book of the same title that was to appear in 1965 the procedure is reversed. Another distinction is that while in the article the tables of correlations are divided as between Station stone directions and Trilithon and Sarsen directions, in the book these have been equated with Stonehenge I and Ill.
  Meanwhile the Nature article created a world-wide stir. On the whole the general public was delighted by Professor Hawkins's ideas—evidently they were getting the Stonehenge they desired. The computer magazine IBM News summed up this mood in saying, 'Those crazy old Druids may have known what they were doing after all.'
  Much stimulated by this reception and by hearing that Mr C. A. Newham had suspected an equinoctial alignment at Stonehenge, Professor Hawkins returned to plans and computer and by taking back into consideration three stone holes (B, C, E) which he had not before thought to be significant 'positions', was able to find a further series of paired points which could coincide with risings and settings of sun and full moon at the equinox.
  Professor Hawkins had also been excited by reading the well-known passage in which Diodorus describes an island of the Hyperboreans (probably but not certainly Britain) that possessed a magnificent temple of the sun god and which every 19 years was visited by the god who nightly danced and played the cythara.
  This passage reminded the Professor of the fact, recognized in the 5th century BC, that 19 solar years almost exactly correspond to 235 lunations. Relating this Metonic cycle with the lunar eclipse cycle of 18•61 years, Professor Hawkins claimed that if the priests kept count of a cycle composed of two periods of 19 years and one of 18, they would be able to predict eclipses of the sun and moon. He had long been looking for an explanation of the 56 Aubrey holes, and here in his new tripartite eclipse cycle he thought he had found it. He saw the Aubrey circle as a giant marker, where, by moving a stone one hole each year, the priests could keep check of the passage of the 56 years. More than that, by a more intricate movement of six stones it would be possible to predict 'every important moon event for hundreds of years'—although certain resettings would be necessary. These findings appeared in another Nature article, 'Stonehenge: a Neolithic Computer', in June 1964. They were incorporated together with Hawkins's earlier work and some account of the history, legends and archaeology of Stonehenge, in the Stonehenge Decoded volume already mentioned.
  The article and the book provoked a considerable amount of resistance, especially among archaeologists, and it was evidently important to get the opinion of other astronomers. In 1966, at a time when it was known that Professor Atkinson's severe review of Stonehenge Decoded was shortly to appear in ANTIQUITY, Professor Fred Hoyle wrote a short piece for Nature. In this he said that so far as the alignments went he had 're-worked' them and was of the opinion that the arrangement was not a random one. As for the Aubrey hole 'computer', he was also prepared to accept that it was designed for eclipse prediction, but totally disagreed with Hawkins over the way in which it was used. He pointed out (1) that there was no need to set out a huge circle to keep tallies of 56 years; (2) that Hawkins's counting system could not be calibrated by the prehistoric builders—Hawkins himself having established it by using tables of known eclipses; (3) that in fact at any one point, such as Stonehenge, the predictor could only foretell a small fraction of all eclipses. A priest could hardly gain credit by successes that might be ten years apart. Instead Professor Hoyle suggested that the Aubrey holes represented the ecliptic, and were used together with stones representing the sun, the moon and the nodes of the moon's orbit. To predict eclipses by this means involved an extremely complicated movement of the stones and also frequent corrections, which could be effected partly by direct observation of the actual positions of sun and moon, partly by means of the alignments. This way of using the Aubrey holes would enable 'almost every eclipse' to be predicted, although only about half would in fact be visible from Stonehenge. Professor Hoyle ended this Nature paper by a curious piece of theology. He suggested that priests, observing that whenever the stones representing the divine sun and moon were closely associated with the stone representing the invisible nodes of the moon, the old divinities were eclipsed, would conclude that this third, unseen god was the most powerful. Could this, he asked, be the origin of the invisible, all-powerful god of Isaiah? Could it have destroyed sun-worship? Could it have originated the doctrine of the Trinity?
  In the December number of ANTIQUITY for 1966 Professor Hoyle further developed his ideas, writing from the point of view of how we (or rather he, for I doubt if many of his rea&rs could follow the complexity of his mathematical and astronomical reasoning) could set about the determination of calendrical seasons and of eclipses if set down as strangers on the planet Earth. He concluded that an excellent way would be to make a structure such as Stonehenge I. In this paper Hoyle seems more inclined to doubt the validity of Hawkins's alignments, recognizing the subjective element in the choice of 'positions'. He also finds the differences between the observed and calculated alignments to be excessive. He gets out of these diffculties by suggesting that the apparent inaccuracies were intentional, for the alignments were not on the extreme rising and setting points (very diffcult to observe because at the solstice turning points the sun and moon appear to stand still for several days), but to points within the extremes from which the turning points could be calculated with much greater accuracy than they could be observed. He found that the 'inaccuracies' fitted very well with this assumption, and that the choice of data was in no way objective.
  At the same time he warned that his theory demanded from the builders of Stonehenge I an intellectual prowess astonishing among primitive farmers. 'A veritable Newton or Einstein must have been at work.'
  Professor Hoyle returned to this surmise at the end of his article. When I discussed his Nature article with him earlier in the year, he had said that he did not find very much of interest in Stonehenge Ill. Now he put forward a most remarkable social-cum-biological theory. Warning against the tendency to equate intellectual with technical advance, he suggested that the late Neolithic constructors of Stonehenge I formed an isolated group or gene pool, with extraordinary mental gifts. The subsequent arrival of Beaker and other invaders from the continent diluted their genius, for the 'understanding necessary to operate Stonehenge I had been lost by the time of Il', and may not have been recovered by the great builders of Ill.
  The works of Professors Hawkins and Hoyle drew criticisms from both archaeologists and astronomers. Of those directed against Professor Hawkins, by far the most vigorous were contained in 'Moonshine on Stonehenge', Professor Atkinson's review of Stonehenge Decoded which appeared in the September 1966 issue of ANTIQUITY. In biting language he exposed the numerous archaeological howlers in the book, the extent to which Hawkins had selected his 'positions' and mixed various building periods together, and the faults in his
method of calculating the validity of his statistics. He also pointed out the inaccurate nature of the plans used, and of some of the 'positions' selected, and insisted that the 'positions' F, G and H which played an important part in the alignments were usually considered to be natural tree holes.
  From the astronomical side (all writing in Nature) Mr D. H. Sadler argued that eclipses could more easily be predicted from fortyseven marks, while Messrs R. Colton and R. L. Martin declared that the 56-year eclipse cycle does not even exist—a judgement confidently endorsed by an eminent correspondent whose name has to be withheld.
  The comments on Professor Hoyle's papers have been more restrained, partly from a proper respect for his high distinction and the greater elegance of his propositions, and partly, perhaps, because few of us were confident that we had been capable of following his reasoning. Professor Hawkins himself was rather sour, and was even sarcastic about the gene pool of Neolithic man. Professor Thom found Hoyle's thinking in general harmony with his own theories of megalithic orientation, while Mr Newham, who has worked for years on the astronomical interpretation of Stonehenge, was judiciously critical and declared his belief that 'if Professor Hoyle had been made aware of all of the facts, his approach would be entirely different'. Professor Atkinson put most emphasis on the present uncertainty of almost all the basic data—increased during the course of the debate by a photogrammetric survey which had proved the inaccuracy of many of the alignments based on plans, and by new radiocarbon datings for Stonehenge. As for Mr Newall, he was convinced that all alignments using the F, G and H holes must be discounted—and were therefore coincidences—while he was equally sceptical of most of the sarsen alignments. Altogether he questioned 11 out of the 23 readings in Hoyle's tables.
I have given this survey of the history of the controversy partly for the convenience of readers, but more because it reveals the extraordinarily shifting and largely self-defeating development of the astronomical argument. In particular, there is the fact that Professor Hoyle found it possible to adopt Professor Hawkins's assumption that Stonehenge was built primarily as an astronomical device, but then put forward totally different ideas as to how it was used and the relative importance of the many structural elements. This is surely a proof of how far the astronomical interpretations are the product of modern minds (instruments which must work with thousands of years of accrued knowledge of mathematical principles and the nature of the universe) playing over the pattern of Stonehenge and seeing how it could be used for their own kinds of astronomical purpose. Considering the extreme historical improbability of the predictor-observatory idea, and the extreme unsuitability of many of the supposed items of equipment, the rest of us have the right to expect close agreement between the astronomers themselves on the inevitability of their interpretations. It seems to me that the Hawkins-Hoyle axis is most damaging to the whole astronomical position.
  As Professor Hawkins has claimed his success in decoding Stonehenge with such absolute confidence, the only appropriate way to summarize the present position seems to be to put all the arguments against his case and see what remains at the end. Most of the criticisms I shall offer have already in their essence been made by Professor Atkinson and others, but there will be differences in emphasis.
  It seems I must begin with an effort to test the reliability of Professor Hawkins's thinking. This is because people better qualified than I am in astronomy and the use of computers find it difficult to know just what it is that he has extracted from his machine, and we have to ask whether he is rigorous enough to be wholly trustworthy. Atkinson has already pointed to the odd little illogicality when in his defence of the use of the F, G and H holes Hawkins says that there 'is no record of trees having grown there'. There are other lapses that seem worse than illogicalities—for example, the use of the Diodorus passage. Professor Hawkins must know that it is not even certain that the island of the Hyperboreans is Britain, and that the adjective applied to the temple is usually translated 'circular' rather than 'spherical'. Yet he works up from quoting Mr Newham, who asks if 'spherical in shape' could mean 'spherical in use', i.e. astronomical, to the bald statement that Diodorus said 'there was a spherical, or astronomic, temple'. Again, Diodorus stated that 'the supervisors of the temple are called Boreades . . . and the succession to these positions is always kept in the family'. Yet Hawkins implies a different meaning when he writes that predictions were possible to 'a person with knowledge of the cycle—knowledge "kept in their family", as Diodorus says'.
  Next come the interlocked subjects of the use made of the features of Stonehenge and the degree of selection. No answer has, I think, been given to Atkinson's criticism of the way in which Hawkins mixed different building periods in his alignment points, or of the imprecision of bearings based on paired gaps between stones and on estimates of the former positions of sloping, fallen or missing stones. I have myself been surprised by the meekness with which archaeologists have accepted the forcing of the four Station stones into Stonehenge I. These have been given such great importance in both Hawkins's and Hoyle's calculations that it is necessary to look at them more closely. It should be remembered that when they were being judged only by the archaeological evidence, they were usually assigned to period Illa and were associated with a geometrical fixing of the centre and axis of the sarsen features. This dating was due not only to the geometrical relationship with centre and axis (this could apply also to period Il, though not I), but to the fact that one (93) of the two surviving Station stones was undoubtedly tooled in the period Ill manner before it was erected.
  Now it has been established that the short sides of the Station stone rectangle are aligned on the midsummer sunrise, and the long sides on the rising of the full moon nearest to the solstice. Stonehenge stands only a few miles off the latitude at which these lines cross at right-angles. The astronomers have naturally wished to believe that this latitude must have been deliberately chosen for the site of Stonehenge—and this remains one of the most likely of their suppositions. On the other hand it is fair to say that if our old social and economic arguments for the site were in fact valid, and if, as we have always assumed, the axis of periods Il and Ill was being related to midsummer sunrise, then, granted a rectangular layout for the purposes of field geometry, the moonrise alignment would follow fortuitously.
  Now as to the date. While it is only possible to say with certainty that the original Station stones or posts (a predecessor for 93 has to be assumed) must have been placed after the ditch-bank and Aubrey operation, and therefore that a 1b date would be possible for them, their very casual relationship to the Aubrey holes certainly looks as though they were not planned at the same time. Moreover, as the enclosure dug round 94 actually destroys an Aubrey hole, while that round 93 interrupts the Aubrey circle, it can be said that there was still at least an interest in the Station stones at a time when interest in the Aubrey holes (whether as tally or protractor) appears to have been over.
  Altogether I do not think that the archaeological probabilities can be so lightly set aside as they are when Professor Hawkins blandly says: 'I believe these stones belong to Stonehenge I.' Yet without the early date much falls to the ground—most of all in Professor Hoyle's scheme of things.
  As to the general question of selection, it is of course a vast one. No one has answered Atkinson's exposure of the selection of the 'positions', or of the fact that Hawkins made several errors in his proof that his significant alignments could not be due to chance. This kind of selection was sharply revealed when, as we have seen (p. 175), Hawkins went back to 'positions' he had ignored when he was shown that they might, after all, be 'significant'. The picture of all the trilithons being aligned through the peristyle on to maximum risings and settings sounds impressive until you see that one is simply the opposite of the sunrise alignment, while in the other four the positional relation between trilithon gap and peristyle gap is different in every alignment.
  I believe that selection has also been practised on a scale so large as to be inconspicuous. For example, because everything is based on plans, all significance has been sought horizontally in relation to the horizon, whereas it is plain that the builders gave their greatest efforts to make vertical constructions—to lifting huge lintels quite useless for these observations. Then there is the selection of full moons nearest the solstices. In known essays in primitive astronomy, I understand, the whole sequence of full moons is always treated, and very often the new moons as well. The Neolithic farmers of Britain might have had a special interest in solsticial full moons— but they very well might not. There is the selection, without a trace of evidence, of the movable marker stone method. There is the rejection of the blue stones—-which are simply ignored. In the Diodorus story the astronomer in Hawkins immediately picks out the 19 years, but neglects the dancing of the sun god— which might at least equally relate to the uses of the temple.
  Finally I come to two opposed types of evidence, one concerned with the very small— with individual human beings at work on the spot; the other concerned with the large— with the cultural history of Britain and of the world.
  For the first, I am thinking particularly of the Aubrey holes. If men, no fonder of useless hard work than we are, wanted to make a series of marks against which stones were to be moved (whether for a simple tally or a protractor) could they conceivably have been so idiotic as to start with their antler picks on digging a ring of large and quite irregularly formed holes which they were almost at once to refill? Put yourselves in their shoes (if they had them). To me it is unimaginable. I believe that it is only the neat work of the Ministry of Works in marking the centre of these ragged pits with turf-free discs, and their transfer to the plans, that hag made such a fantasy appear credible.
 It is the historical evidence which has always seemed to me to carry most weight of all. Within Britain itself we have the broadly established story of a Neolithic people with very simple material equipment and a religion absorbed in Mother Goddess imagery and earth-fast burial chambers—hence presumably with chthonic powers. They built Stonehenge I—and the idea that they made the Aubrey holes (and other similar rings with finsignificant' numbers of pits) to receive libations as well as the ashes of their dead has appeared reasonable. They were followed (roughly speaking) by the Beaker people who, with their probable Indo-European inheritance and their known fondness for sun symbols, can be said with some confidence to have led Britain from earthy towards celestial divinities. They began the conversion of Stonehenge to a temple with celestial orientations, adjusting the probably haphazard axis of the old ring, possibly with the help of the Station stones. The Wessex chieftains with their wealth and cultural contacts were able to bring the temple to its full magnificence.
  This is familiar stuff, but it is needful to show how harmoniously Stonehenge fits into British history, and British history into European and Mediterranean history. Turning to the world scene, is it possible that Neolithic or even Bronze Age Britain was a nest of calculating geniuses? It is, of course, possible for isolated societies to make remarkable advances in observational astronomy if their attention becomes focused. There is the example of the Chinese and the Maya, but they were already civilized people who had, or devised, scripts and numerical systems for the purpose. Could the poorly equipped inhabitants of a notoriously cloudy island have stepped, in this one direction, so far out of the cultural context to which they have always belonged? Not much is known of the beginnings of astronomy among the Babylonians, but they certainly had no real success with eclipse predictions until the great burst of intellectual illumination that came to Asia and Europe in about the 6th century BC. Conversely, if through some unique interbreeding of genius of the kind imagined by Professor Hoyle the Britons developed modes of conceptual thought quite unlike those of any of their contemporaries, is it conceivable that news of it did not spread eastward? Even if the highest achievement ended with the Stone Age, it was still high when Wessex is known to have been in touch with Greece, and Greece with the Levant.
  Again, although it is very true that intellectual and technical progress should not be equated, there is no known instance in the history of man of brilliant thinkers having no concern for the arts or more graceful living—yet how much of these do we find in the huts of our secondary Neolithic folk? Above all, it is enormously improbable that they had script or numbers. Could the long record-keeping necessary for both the Hawkins and the Hoyle stories be possible without them? Perhaps it is just possible, but very, very unlikely.
Book ChrOniCIe—continuedfrom p. 173
Architecture and Sculpture in Early Britain: Celtic, Saxon, Norman by Robert Stoll with photographs by Jean Roubier. London: Thames and Hudson, 1967. 356 pp. include 254 photographs and 1 map. First published in Vienna in 1966 (Anton Schroll & Co.), this is translated from the German by J. Maxwell Brownjohn. {5 ss.
An Introduction to the Greek World by Peter D. Amott. London: Macmillan, 1967. 238 pp., 24 pls. (listed by number, but unnumbered thereafter). 30s. Mr Arnott is Associate Professor of Classics and Drunatic Arts at the University of Iowa.
Plants and Archaeology by Geoffrey Dimbleby. London: John Baker, 1967. 187 pp., frontis. and 23 pls., 6 figs. 50s. By the Professor of Human Environment at the Institute of Archaeology, University of London, the Introduction opens with the arresting words 'In principle I am opposed to the writing of this book.'
  I am forced to the conclusion that nothing of any great moment has been established by the astronomical nouveau vague flowing over Stonehenge. To the long-accepted knowledge that from Stonehenge Il onwards the builders were concerned with the solstices, it may perhaps have been added that they had an empirical awareness of the significance of the latitude of Stonehenge—and if so that they were also interested in the extreme risings and settings of the moon.
  I see no argument strong or consistent enough to change our previous belief that Stonehenge was intended primarily as a sanctuary, that the intention behind the great horseshoes and circles of stone was architectural and not mechanical, that what went on there was mainly ritualistic and not intellectual. I believe that the orientation was intended to express a religious symbolism just as the orientation of Christian churches expresses a symbolism. I feel that we should show that this is indeed the scientific age by refusing to give way to our own form of wishful thinking.
Lost Land Emerging by Walter B. Emery. New York: Charles Scribner, 1967. 334 pp., 32 pls., 49 figs. $7-95. The author states that this book 'is designed to provide, for the general reader, an account of Nubia, so soon to be destroyed . . . in no way intended for the specialist. . . . ' It is encouraging for those who believe in the proper haute vulgarisation of archaeology that this task should have been attempted by one of the world's foremost Egyptologists.
Archäologische Feldmethode (Field Archaeology) by Georg Theodor Schwarz. Thun/ Munich: Ott Verlag, 1967. 219 pp., 12 pls., 30 figs. sw. Frs./DM 24.80.
Der Moosberg bei Murnau by Jochen Garbsch. Munich: Verlag C. H. Beck, 1966. 122 pp., 24 pls., 29 figs, (tafeln 1—53), 1 in-text pl., 11 in-text figs., 1 map, 3 plans (in pocket). Contributions by P. Reinecke, F. Wagner and N. Walke. A late Roman defended site 50 km. SW of Munich. DM 48.
continued on p. 189
ANTIQUITY
  
GOD IN THE MACHINE
  
174
  
174
  

  
174
  
