ANTIQUITY, 1.111, 1979
Hoyle on Stonehenge
GORDON MOIR
This is a review article on Sir Fred Hoyle's book : On Stonehenge (London : Heinemann, 1977. 128 pp., 50 figs., 9 tables. {4-50). Dr Gordon Moir is a part-time lecturer at Newcastle Polytechnic, and a guest member of staffin the School of Physics, University of Newcastle upon Tyne, where he is working with Dr F. R. Stephenson on the history of astronomy. Dr Moir is also working on the stability ofrotating stars. He has had,for some time, an interest in megalithic astronomy, which has taken him to many sites from Wiltshire to the Outer Hebrides. He has also, for the last five years, participated in excavations. He says, 'I intend to publish further articles on megalithic astronomy, taking a very sceptical standpoint.' We look forward to reading them.
  
In 1966 [Sir] Fred Hoyle published two papers on the possible use of Stonehenge as an eclipse predictor (1966a,b). He has now (Hoyle, 1977) returned to this theme with a very clearly written and well-illustrated book that is essentially an expansion of the material in the two 1966 papers. In brief, Hoyle proposes that the extant features of Stonehenge I provide the necessary means systematically to observe the sun and moon and to keep track of the nodes of the lunar orbit. This would provide suffcient information to allow eclipses of the moon to be predicted. He also proposes that by the time of Stonehenge Ill this method was superseded by the use of the Saros cycle of 18 years 11 days to predict eclipses. This last method almost certainly implies that written records of events at full moon were kept. Since there is no evidence from the British Late Neolithic or Early Bronze Age of writing or numeracy this proposal is purely speculative.
  By Stonehenge I is meant the circular bank and ditch surrounding the 56 Aubrey holes; the four station positions 91, 92, 93 and 94, which form an approximate rectangle; the north-eastern entrance to the henge, containing holes A, B, C, D and E, and with the Heel stone beyond; and other holes F, G and H.
  Hoyle suggests that the Aubrey holes function as a model of the ecliptic, the apparent path of the sun through the zodiac each year. Stone markers, moved from Aubrey hole to Aubrey hole according to simple rules, represent the sun, moon and lunar nodes as they move round the ecliptic. A conjunction or opposition of the sun marker and moon marker occurring at a node-marker indicates a possible eclipse. The two node-markers, which of course are always opposite each other, move in the opposite direction to the sun and moon markers, and complete a circuit of the Aubrey holes in 18'23 years, close to the true value of 18•61 years. Although it is convenient to talk of the moon moving along the ecliptic, the lunar orbit is in fact inclined at an angle of about 5 0 to it. The orbit intersects the ecliptic in two points—the lunar nodes—which are 1800 apart. In order correctly to set the sun, moon and node markers, sighting-lines using the four station positions, the Heel stone and positions A, D, F, G and H are presumed to be used. It is assumed that holes which are now empty once held stones or posts. This eclipse prediction method can only be satisfactory for eclipses of the moon (Hoyle, 1977, 88).
  Crucial to Hoyle's eclipse interpretation is the method to be used in setting the node-markers. Because of the motion of the nodes the moon's monthly declination extrema vary between the approximate limits ±290 and ± 190 over years. These limits have been termed the lunar major and minor standstills respectively (Thom, 1967). When the moon is at one of its standstills, the nodes are 900 away on the ecliptic, i.e. at the points occupied by the sun at the equinoxes. These two positions on the Aubrey circle can easily be found by bisecting the sun's midsummer and midwinter positions on the circle. So in order to set the node-markers, the time of one or other lunar standstill must be found by watching the moon and then placing the node-markers at the sun's equinoctial positions. For one reason or another, Hoyle rejects the lines indicating the minor standstill, so only the +290 indications need be considered.
  Since at the standstill, as the term suggests, the moon's monthly declination extrema vary very slowly, the time of the standstill is very diffcult to determine. It is here that Hoyle introduces a particularly original idea. This is to observe the moon both before and after the standstill when the changes in the monthly declination extrema are more rapid, and so observations can be made more accurately. The time of the standstill is then halfway between. Hoyle shows that almost all the sighting-lines are inside the correct orientations for standstill positions. What at first sight look like errors in the lines are shown to be a subtle refinement to improve observations. The same problem— of defining the exact date of standstill—arises with determining the sun's standstills (solstices), and the same technique to overcome it can be applied.
  In practice how could this observational technique be used ? Following Hoyle, if we have a thin stone, or post, of width 12 arc minutes 36' say, as a foresight when seen from the observing position, on a line about 36' in azimuth inside the standstill line, then it will obscure the first gleam of the rising moon for a few months (on the day of the declination extremum) about a year before and after the standstill. Hoyle terms this 'establishing a blank sequence' in a series of horizon observations of the moon rising at its declination extremum. In order to define it two blank sequences have to be established, one before and one after the standstill. Using this technique to define the solar solstices would present few problems, because of the regularity of the sun's motion and its much greater brightness. However, for reasons given below, I strongly suspect that it would be impossible to use this technique for the moon. It is worth noting that Thom does not anywhere find evidence for this blank sequence technique.
  The problems connected with Hoyle's blank sequence technique can be placed in two categories. The first covers the physical problems of visibility of the moon on the horizon in its different phases, variable refraction, weather, etc., and the second category involves effects inherent in the motion of the moon.
  In his book Hoyle always shows the moon as full, but of course in practice it can be in any phase at the crucial time. The full moon is as bright as about magnitude — 13, but as the area seen to be illuminated decreases, the brightness diminishes rapidly (Fessenkov, 1962). When on the horizon the moon is subjected, as with every other heavenly body, to the obscuration of the atmosphere, which can reduce the apparent brightness by about six or seven magnitudes. Thus a crescent moon, though visible above the horizon, may well not be visible on the horizon. And it is even less likely to be visible at 'first gleam' or 'last gleam', the definitions of moonrise and moonset adopted by Hoyle.
  The moon appears crescent when it is near the sun, either as an old moon or a young moon. New moon occurs when the moon is in conjunction with the sun and so is effectively completely invisible. Four cases must be distinguished : old moon rising, old moon setting, young moon rising, and young moon setting. The young moon setting and old moon rising occur when the sun is below the horizon, and so perhaps may be visible as quite thin crescents on the horizon (say only two days before or after new). But the young moon rising or old moon setting occur during the day, and so the moon will have to be much further from the sun, to compensate for the sun's brightness, before being visible on the horizon. Remembering that the moon's brightness is much reduced on the horizon, it may well be that the moon has to be much further away from new to be visible during the day at rising or setting (possibly as much as five days). If so, at least seven days in every month would be denied the observers. A declination extremum that occurred on one of these seven days could not be incorporated in any observational programme. A whole blank sequence might thus be lost with another 18•61 years to wait for the next one. Further, a declination extremum occurs about two days earlier each (synodic) month of new moon to new moon. So three successive declination extrema could fall near the new moon and be lost.
  The above considerations have to be modified when we consider the difference between rising and setting. The setting moon can be followed down towards the horizon by the observer and is thus inherently easier to observe. The daytime rising moon may never be visible, except when the exact time and position of moonrise are known. Of the four lunar lines claimed by Hoyle, three are for risings and only one is for setting. This in itself is a strong argument against the builders of Stonehenge I having astronomy as a primary consideration.
ANTIQUITY  It is unfortunate that the above discussion of the visibility of the moon on the horizon cannot be more precise, but there are no detailed records of these phenomena known to me. Until the conditions under which the moon may be seen rising or setting are fully understood, any consideration of lunar horizon phenomena in astro-archaeology must remain speculative.
  Recall that the definition of moonrise is when the first tip of the moon appears over the horizon—i.e. 'first gleam'. Moonset—'last gleam'—is when the last tip of the moon just disappears below the horizon. Now consider the setting young moon. The sun has already set, and the leading edge of the moon is illuminated. But the trailing edge—the part that sets last—is dark. So even if the crescent is developed enough to be seen on the horizon, the actual position of setting cannot be observed—it can only be estimated from the point where the illuminated portion has already set. This will inevitably mean inaccuracies in deciding whether the setting moon has or has not set behind a stone. As the moon gets near to being full, this effect is consequently reduced.
  Similar remarks apply to the old moon rising. Once past full it will rise at night—which helps observation—but at the actual moment of moonrise the leading edge will not be illuminated. The first gleam will in general be from the upper (i.e. left-hand side) cusp. Admittedly this will not be far on the horizon from where the unilluminated limb has just emerged. But the objective is to observe whether or not that particular rising is in a blank sequence—i.e. whether it is or is not obscured by a stone. The actual point of rising on the horizon is most important.
  The other two cases—young moon rising and old moon setting—resolve the difficulty just described. The rising and setting edges will be illuminated, and the points on the horizon of rising and setting will be clearly defined. But in these cases the sun is above the horizon—to illuminate the required limb—and so it is daytime. Thus unless the moon is at or near full we have a dual problem. If we choose to observe the moon during the night—when it is easily seen—the rising or setting limb is not illuminated. Or if we choose to observe the moon when the required limb is illuminated then observations will have to be made during the day and it can easily be missed.
  Of course we are not free to choose when to observe the moon. The standstills can occur at any time of the year, and so at any phase of the moon. If the moon is not observed one year or two years before and after the standstill, it will be in a different phase at the return blank sequence. This will increase the problems of correctly defining the blank sequences. In some unfortunate cases the moon could be new at either the initial or return sequence. If the moon is new at, say, the +290 standstill, then it will be new a year before and after at the blank sequence. But it will then be full at the —29 0 standstill and its blank sequences, and thus readily observed. Furthermore, observations made one year or two years before and after the standstill will be made at approximately the same time of day and same time of year. This means that the same sort of refraction conditions would be encountered, which would help towards as accurate observations as possible.
  All heavenly bodies near the horizon, as well as being diminished in brightness by atmospheric absorption, are also subjected to increasing refraction as they approach the horizon. If this refraction were constant it would provide no problem. However it is not constant, varying with the time of day, time of year, temperature and pressure and other factors not so well understood. It is these variations in refraction that cause the sun sometimes to appear highly distorted when setting. O'Connell (1958) has published a fine series of photographs illustrating this. Similar anomalous refraction effects will occur with the moon rising and setting. That they have not been reported is due, no doubt, to the diffculty in observing the moon on the horizon. The result of refraction variations is to raise or lower the moon, thus altering the position on the horizon of rising or setting. This will make the decision whether or not the moon has risen or set behind a stone more diffcult. The effects of variations in refraction will be minimized by observing at the same time of day and same part of the year, when similar temperature and pressure conditions could be expected.
  Thus to ensure the same refraction conditions and to ensure that the moon is in the same phase, we should expect that the blank sequences should be about one year or two years before and after the standstill. The lines actually found by Hoyle at Stonehenge are +29 0 rising (twice), 29 0 rising and -1-290 setting. The omission of the —290 setting is serious, as has already been noted. Following the standard notation, these lines are, respectively, 92+G with offset o•1 0, centre—A with offset 3•1 0 , 93+92 with offset 2•0 0 and 91+94 with offset o•40 . All the offsets are, of course, inside the standstill direction. The offsets for one year and two years are o• 55 0 and 2• 1 0 respectively. Leaving aside considerations of whether or not A and G are man-made, that stone 94 is now missing, stone 91 fallen, and stone 93 apparently erected later (it has been worked), these figures suggest that the only line that can be seriously accepted is 93+92 (i.e. —29 0 rising). The line is a possibility, the offset corresponding to ten months. However, Hoyle shows that offsets of less than 0•5 0 are subject to an unacceptable error.
  The line is one of the long sides of the station stone rectangle. Stonehenge is built near the latitude at which the line for +240 (midsum-mer sunrise) is at right angles to the line for —29 0 rising (Newham, 1964). If the short sides of the rectangle are meant to be parallel to the line stone, which seems reasonable enough, then the long sides will automatically indicate —290 rising. Whether one considers this an example of the ingenuity of the Stonehenge I builders in selecting the site, or pure chance, is a matter of personal opinion. I incline to the view that it is chance.
  The weather is another factor that would have made moon observations more diffcult. It is generally claimed that the climate was better in the Late Neolithic and Early Bronze Age and hence that visibility was better. The inference is by no means certain. Visibility can be relatively poor on hot sunny days. Perhaps it would be instructive to consider present-day weather at Stonehenge (Table 1). The figures are extracted from Climatical Normals (HMSO, 1949) and relate to Larkhill (51 0 11 'N, 1 0 48'W, 440 ft (224 m)) and Boscombe Down (51 0 10' N, 1 0 45'W, 417 ft (217 m)) the two observing stations nearest to Stonehenge (51 0 11 'N, 1 0 49'W, 335 ft, (102 m)).
  Clearly the visibility at Larkhill is significantly better than at Boscombe Down, though the data for Boscombe Down are more widely spaced during the day. But even at Larkhill visibility is less than six miles for 20 per cent of the time, so the horizons are obscured for one day in five. When the horizon is visible, it does not, of course, mean that the moon will be visible beyond it. At Larkhill visibility is less than 13 miles for half the time, and at Boscombe Down for more than 70 per cent of the time. Assuming that the present visibility at Stonehenge is similar to that at nearby Larkhill and Boscombe Down, it is apparent that it would be impracticable to use Stonehenge I as an eclipse predictor today, for owing to the unfavourable weather the moon would be obscured too often.
  I shall now consider the other category of factors that make consistent moon observations implausible—effects resulting from the motion of the moon.
  The moon's declination changes very rapidly. This is because it moves round the ecliptic in one month, and so its declination has to change from +29 0 to —29 0 in 14 days at the major standstill. At Stonehenge, this corresponds to a change of 101 0 in azimuth for the rising positions on the horizon. Even at the standstill, or declination extrema, the change in declination 12 hours before or after a
  
Table 1. Percentage frequencies of days on which visibility is within the stated ranges at the stated times
LARKHILL•70 kmVisibility ranges in miles and kilometres
	km	10'14—20'12 km  over 12 •5 over 20•12 km0900 hrs
1300 hrs
1500 hrs11
6
619
13
1229
24
2541
57
57BOSCOMBE DOWN0—2 • 5Visibility ranges in miles and kilometres
	km	10'78—22'05 km  over 13'7 over 2205 km0700 hrs
1300 hrs
1800 hrs24
9
1234
2834
38
378
28
23ANTIQUITY
  
declination extremum is about 12'. This corresponds to a change in azimuth of 28'. The diameter of the moon is about 31'. So the difference between the moon rising at its declination maximum and rising 12 hours before the maximum is virtually its own diameter on the horizon. Exactly the same phenomenon occurs at moonset. It is this problem —that of the variability in the position of moonrise or moonset even at the standstills—that has caused Thom (1971, Chs 8,9) to introduce his theory of extrapolation and his consequent explanation of stone rows.
  Recalling that Hoyle postulates a thin stone or post of diameter 12', we see that the moon may rise one side of the post or the other according to whether the time of moonrise is at the declination extremum, or 12 hours before or 12 hours after. This will make it exceedingly diffcult to judge whether a blank sequence has started or finished. Now of course it would be rare to have moonrise occur as much as 12 hours away from the declination extremum. On the average it will be six hours away. This corresponds to a change in declination of 3' and a corresponding change in azimuth of about 7', i.e. less than the apparent width of the post. This unavoidable error becomes less and less important as the offset is increased and so the monthly changes in declination extrema get larger. After one year, the declination extrema change by 5' in azimuth per month. So a post of angular diameter 12' wide, offset 33' (corresponding to one year), will give a blank sequence of two successive months on the average. The above source of error will introduce errors both before and after the standstill. Hoyle is able to show that by taking the mean of these errors the mean error is brought within acceptable bounds, on the average. Thus, provided that enough sets of observations are made, with an offset larger than 30', the error can be controlled. However, each set of observations is separated by 18•61 years; and at any one set of observations the error can be much larger than 7'.
  There are many inequalities in the moon's motion. These include a now well-known perturbation in declination of 9' amplitude, and period 173 days. Hoyle ignores this perturbation, but it corresponds to an oscillation on the horizon of ±20' near the ±290 standstills. Thus this effectcan displace the point of rising of the moon on the horizon by about 40' in 87 days, though on the average we would not expect such a large displacement. Some of the other inequalities will also make (much smaller) contributions to this variation in the point of rising.
  Combination of the two sources of unavoidable errors described in the last two paragraphs means that for many months at the time of a blank sequence the moon could appear and reappear on both sides of the post as well as behind it. At many standstills it would be impossible to define one or both blank sequences and hence impossible to set the node-markers with any accuracy. As it stands the eclipse predictor could not be made to work.
  Very probably the builders of Stonehenge I intended to mark midsummer sunrise. It does not follow that they intended to observe this phenomenon with precision. I have attempted to show that they could not, even if they had so wished, observe the moon with precision. Possibly they intended to mark the inner and outer limits to the moon's declination ranges. This would seem quite unexceptionable. The conclusion that Stonehenge was a device for predicting eclipses is, however, untenable. Other lunar explanations of Stonehenge, e.g. that due to Beach (1977) are equally suspect. Finally, it may be remarked that many of the problems in observing the moon described above apply with equal force to Thom's researches on megalithic lunar observations (1971).
BIBLIOGRAPHY(See Professor R. y. C. Atkinson's comment opposite.)
  
BEACH, A. D. 1977. Stonehenge I and lunar dynamics, Nature, 265, 17—21.
FESSENKOV, v. G. 1962. Photometry of the moon in (ed.) Z. Kopal, Physics and astronomy of the moon (London).
HMSO. 1949. Percentage frequencies of various visibility ranges at certain places in the British Isles between the years 1927 and 1936, M.O. 251.
HOYLE, Sir F. 1966a. Stonehenge—an eclipse predictor, Nature, 211, 454—6.
1966b. Speculations on Stonehenge, Antiquity, XL, 262—76.
1977. On Stonehenge (London).
NEWHAM, c. A. 1964. The enigma of Stonehenge (privately printed).
O'CONNELL, D. J. K. 1958. The green flash and other low sun phenomena (Vatican Observatory).
THOM, A. 1967. Megalithic sites in Britain (Oxford). 1971. Megalithic lunar observatories (Oxford).
At the author's request we asked Professor R. J. C. Atkinson to comment; he writes : Dr Moir has suggested that some archaeological comment be made on several aspects of Hoyle's book. The first is the relationship of the four Stations to the Aubrey Holes. The short answer is that the Stations are later, and do not form part of the original plan of period I. They may well belong to period Il.
  His second question is about the date and status of holes A—H. None of these can be dated directly, either stratigraphically or by finds. On grounds of symmetry, however, holes A, D and E belong to period I, and holes B and C to period Il or later. Holes F, G and H were all regarded by their excavators as natural tree-holes, and Colonel
Book Chronicle continued from p. 123
Historic landscapes: identification, recording and management. Edited proceedings of a one-day conference. London: Department of Geography, Polytechnic of North London, 1978. 117 pp., 4 figs. 0.50,
Athens by Erik J. Holmberg. Studies in Mediterranean Archaeology Pocketbook 8. Gothenburg : Aström, 1978. 128 pp., 33 pls., x8 figs. No price.
Swedish archaeological bibliography 1971— 1975 edited by Sverker Janson & Hilding Thylander. Index of publications by Margit Engstrom. Stockholm : The Swedish Archaeological Society, 1978.337 pp. SwK. 120.
The effect of man on the landscape: the Lowland Zone edited by Susan Limbrey & J. G. Evans. CBA Research Report No. 21. London : Council for British Archaeology, 1978. r58 pp., illustrated. {10.00.
Kish excavations 1923—1933 with a microfiche catalogue of the objects in Oxford excavated by the Oxford-Field Museum, Chicago, Expedition to Kish in Iraq, 1923—1933, by P. R. S. Moorey. Oxford : Clarendon Press, 1978. 234 PP., 16 figs. 05.00.
Gorgen og Bebyggelsen by Olaf Olsen & Holget Schmidt. Fyrkat enjysk vikingeborg. Copenhagen : Lynge, 1977. 282 pp., many figs., r loose map back of book. No price.
Das Kupferzeitliche Graberfeld von TiszavalkKenderfold by Pål Patay. Budapest : Akademiai Kiado, 1978. 60 pp., 17 pls.» 55 figs. $10.50.
Hawley's descriptions of their fillings bear out this interpretation.
  Thirdly, Dr Moir asks whether the Stonehenge bank would have obscured the natural horizon on any of the significant alignments. A new and detailed calculation, too lengthy to give here, suggests that the bank would have formed an artificial horizon, over-topping the natural one, for the following alignments: 91 to 93 and 94 ; 92 to 93 ; 94 to 93. In these directions the natural horizon would be obscured throughout periods I and Il and during the earlier part of period Ill. This conclusion necessarily rests on assumptions about the eye-height of an observer and the rate of weathering of the bank.
Drawings from Ancient Egypt by William H. Peck. London : Thames Hudson, 1978. 208 pp., 169 pls. (16 in colour), {10.50. 
Recovering Sarepta. A Phoenician city by James B. Pritchard. Princeton : Princeton University Press, 1978. 176 pp., 140 figs. {rx .00.
L'Oppidum des Castels Nages (Gard) (Fouilles 1958—1974) by Michel Py. XXXVe supplement a Gallia. Paris : Editions du CNRS, 1978. 365 PP., 148 figs. No price.
Excavations at Nichoris in Southwest Greece. Volume I, Site, environs and techniques edited by George Rapp, Jr. & S. E. Aschenbrenner. Minneapolis : University of Minnesota Press, 1978. 367 pp., 15 pls., many figs., 4 loose maps in pocket at back of book. $29-75.
Buddhism by Michael Ridley. The Art of World Religions. Poole : Blandford Press, 1978. 183 pp., 39 colour pls., many figs.
The prehistory of Chalchuapa, El Salvador edited by Robert J. Sharer. Philadelphia : University of Pennsylvania Press, 1978. Vol. 1 : Introduction, surface surveys, excavations, monuments and special deposits. 209 pp., many figs. (8 loose in folder in back of book). Vol. 2 : Artifacts and figurines. 231 pp., many figs. Vol. 3 : Pottery and conclusions. 243 pp., many figs. {34-50 per set of 3 vols.
The Ustinow Collection. Terracottas. nona Skupinska-Lovset. Oslo, Bergen, Tromso : Universitetsforlaget, 1978. r55 pp., r51 pls., tables. Kr. 90; $18.00 ; r55 sider.
continued on p. 152

  
HOYLE ON STONEHENGE
  
124
  
124
  

  
124
  
