ANTIQUITY, XLI, 1967
Hoyle on Stonehenge: Some Comments
ANTIQUITY has recently given considerable attention to Stonehenge. Professor R. J. C. Atkinscn reviewed Professor Gerald Hawkins's book Stonehenge Decoded (1966, 212) and
Professor Fred Hoyle discussed Hawkins's theory in the light of his own researches and Atkinson's comments (1966, 253). We asked for comments on his article and print these here.
1. Professor Gerald S. Hawkins of Boston University and Harvard-Smithsonian Observatories writes:
  
Professor Hoyle's use of my Stonehenge findings is as intriguing as it is ingenious. As I said on the BBC-TV programme Chronicle last August, his support of my theory is most welcome, and his speculations deserve and will receive the most careful consideration.
  Unfortunately, I cannot now provide such a suitably thorough analysis. From last summer, when Hoyle first put forward his views, until the time of this writing, I have been on sabbatical leave at the stone circles of Scotland and in Spain, far from my reference material. All I can offer here is a brief preliminary statement for the record, with minimal comment.
My theory is [1] that Stonehenge was (i) a moon and sun observatory,
(ii) a counting device for predicting the extremes of the moon on the horizon, and for eclipses,
(iii) Stonehenge may represent a particular example of a general culture.
I have extended my findings in a definitive paper [2] and have attempted to confine my speculations to a book, Stonehenge Decoded.
  Hoyle supports the first two hypotheses, and agrees with my conclusion [3] that 'Stonehenge may well have been a device of such precision and complexity of design as to indicate a level of intellect far surpassing that which we have hitherto been willing to ascribe to Stone Age man.'
  He goes on to propose some rather small modifications of practical analysis, and some rather large, and extremely provocative, extensions of philosophical interpretation.
  In general, of course, I agree with his agreement. However, I feel obliged to register one minor difference of opinion concerning practical analysis, and to lodge one philosophical caveat. Hoyle discusses at length the so-called builders' errors, the imprecisions of alignment between paired markers and sun or moon. Using equations more complicated, but no more accurate, than mine, he confirms the correlation between the sign of the error in altitude and the sign of the declination which I pointed out in my first Nature paper. He then postulates that the systematic errors were deliberate efforts to facilitate observation at the northern and southern extremes where the sun and moon 'appear to stand still'. I do not concur. From one mid-winter to the next the full moon moves about 1 0, which is three times the amount presumed by Hoyle to be a reasonable error. I must adhere to my original opinion, shared by Newham [4], that the errors were not deliberate but were the result of observational diffculties. The Stonehengers would probably not see the theoretical extreme, because the full phase would not occur very often at the moment of moonrise. A cloudy night at full moon would introduce the same systematic effect.
  Hoyle goes far beyond my guarded conclusion that the Stonehengers were more intelligent than we have thought. He suggests that they were more intelligent than we are.
  Supposing that they used their templeobservatory-computer in ways much subtler than those which I devised, he credits the builders with truly remarkable intellectual perception. He theorizes that this extraordinary group was literally lost in the crowd—absorbed by succeeding waves of migrants—the brilliance which had created a great work on Salisbury Plain dimmed and drowned by genetics.
  That is a fascinating speculation. But it depends upon such far-reaching assumptions concerning intelligence and purpose that I do not now feel qualified to offer an opinion of any consequence on its validity. Perhaps I never will.
NOTES  It may be, I feel, that no astronomer—not even one as gifted and versatile as Hoyle—is equipped to go as a guide so far into the regions of archaeology and anthropology, and the mazes of the spirit.
  
  [1] G. S. Hawkins, Nature, 200, 1963, 306—8; Nature, 202, 1964, 1258—61 ; American Scientist, 53, 1965, 391—408.
  [2] G. S. Hawkins (ed. A. Beer), Vistas In 2. Professor R. J. C. Atkinson writes:
Professor Hoyle's speculations on Stonehenge are both stimulating and far-reaching in their implications. In considering them, it is convenient to begin by summarizing the ways in which they differ from the ideas of Professor Hawkins. In both systems the principal purpose assumed is the prediction of eclipses.
  For Hawkins, the Aubrey Holes serve as tally-marks for counting a 56-year cycle. Individual holes represent eclipses or other events (e.g. extreme mid-winter moonrises), the sequence and intervals of which have previously been determined by repeated observations, and have been independently recorded. An event is predicted for the coming year when a stone marker, moved round by one hole annually, coincides with the Aubrey Hole representing that event. Since the holes form a circle, each coincidence of hole and marker is repeated automatically every 56th year. The alignments between stones provide sight-lines for determining the dates of significant risings and settings of the sun and moon at the solstices and equinoxes. They are, in this system, largely independent of the supposed use of the Aubrey Holes, because this latter device, according to Hawkins, requires recalibration only once in three centuries or more.
  Hoyle suggests, alternatively, that the Aubrey circle can serve as a working model of the ecliptic. Stone markers representing the sun,
Astronomy, vol. 10 (Oxford and New York, 1967). [3] G. S. Hawkins in collaboration with J. B.
White, Stonehenge Decoded (London, 1965).
[4] C. A. Newham, Nature, 211, 1966, 456—8.
the moon and the nodes of the moon's orbit can be moved round to correspond with their real celestial motions; and an eclipse is predicted whenever the sun and moon markers are both suffciently close to the same node, or to opposite nodes. In this system the Aubrey Holes act simply as the graduations on a circular protractor, but the alignments are an integral part of the scheme, providing the means of correcting the movement of the markers. Recalibration is required at fairly frequent intervals if the system is to function successfully.
  Hoyle emphasizes that the accuracy of the alignments falls well short of the builders' assumed capability; but he neatly sidesteps this diffculty by suggesting that they mark not the extreme azimuths, but reference azimuths within the extremes, from which the date of the extreme event could be determined with greater accuracy than by direct observation. He shows that for the alignments given by Hawkins the relation between the observed and calculated azimuths conforms to this ingenious interpretation in a significant way.
  Meanwhile, however, some of the basic data have been revised. In the first place, new radiocarbon dates for Stonehenge I and the Stonehenge 11/111a transition are now available [1]. The appropriate values for the obliquity of the ecliptic, E, are 23 0 57' and 23 0 52' respectively. Secondly, Hawkins has published revised values for a number of the site alignments, obtained from a photogrammetric survey [2]. Some of these differ by more than 2.5 0 from his earlier figures, which are those adopted by Hoyle. Thirdly, it is possible to substitute actual horizon elevations, determined on the site by Mr C. A. Newham [3], for the uniform elevation of 0.70 assumed by Hoyle. These vary between +0.33 0 and +0.62 0.
  Using these new values, I have recalculated the azimuths both for the 'full-orb' case (i.e. with the horizon tangent to the lower limb of the sun or moon) and for 'first or last light' (i.e. with 2' of the sun's or moon's disc showing above the horizon).* For both cases the mean error (disregarding sign) of the alignments in Hoyle's Table I is about six times the maximum error of 0.3 0 which he assumes for the builders' capabilities; but in both cases also the sign of the error is correct in 13 instances out of 15.
  If the sign of the errors is taken into account, the 'first or last light' azimuths give a slightly better fit to Hawkins's alignments. The difference is not suffcient to justify the assumption that one mode of observation is more probable than the other; but it does perhaps warn us that the full-orb mode is not necessarily to be preferred, as Hoyle suggests, for its theoretical advantages. It should be understood, however, that these fresh calculations are no more than an interim exercise, since they are based on a mixture of alignments derived from plans and air photographs, whose reliability evidently varies and is in any case unknown. For this reason I refrain from publishing revised tables at this stage of the inquiry.
  I have also investigated a factor in the alignments which has hitherto been neglected, namely the height of the Stonehenge bank. This is now everywhere very low; but when first built it must have stood to a height of at least 6 ft.t Calculations based on this height
  For obvious reasons, the upper limb must be slightly above the horizon if its direction is to be observed with any accuracy.
  t With allowance for subsequent weathering of the chalk surface, the original mean cross-section of the ditch would be 43 sq. ft. This must be multiplied by a factor of 1 •45 for the expansion of solid chalk to rubble, and by a further factor of 1 • x 1 for
above the local ground-level, and on an observer's eye-height of 5.1 ft.,t suggest that for risings of the sun and moon the crest of the bank would have been below the horizon. For settings, however, the bank would have topped the horizon by up to 1 0 , and would have formed the local skyline, unless its crest were deliberately depressed. Calculations based on a 6 ft. bank show, nevertheless, that only the magnitude, but not the sign, of the errors in the alignments in Hoyle's Table I would be affected.
  It is perhaps significant that one of the sunset alignments, from 91 to 92, passes through a marked gap in the bank opposite Aubrey Hole 20, which corresponds to a solid causeway across the ditch. We cannot be certain that this gap is an original feature; but if it was, its purpose may have been to provide an unobstructed line of sight to the horizon.
  The Aubrey circle, considered simply as a protractor, is of only moderate accuracy. For the 34 excavated holes, the angles subtended at the centre by successive pairs appear to vary by up to about 9 ppr cent of their mean value, or about 35'. At individual holes the cumulative angular error is larger than this, but does not apparently exceed 42'. Errors of this order would prevent the successful prediction of total eclipses; but for partial eclipses they can probably be ignored, since they are small compared with the allowable angular deviations of the sun and moon from a node [4].
  I have considered the substitution of new data, the effect of the Stonehenge bank and the inaccuracies of the Aubrey circle. None of these appears to affect Hoyle's hypothesis substantially. As an hypothesis, it is certainly more comprehensive, more integrated and more elegant than Hawkins's; and on these grounds it is to be preferred as an explanation of how we could use Stonehenge to predict eclipses.
the ratio of the mean diameters of the ditch and bank, giving a mean cross-section of the bank of 69 sq. ft. Differential weathering of the chalk beneath the remains of the bank suggests that its original base width did not exceed 20 ft.
   Prehistoric populations had a mean stature well below our own. The value used here is based on the males from the West Kennet Long Barrow.
As Hoyle very clearly recognizes, however, we cannot say that Stonehenge was used in this way, simply because it could have been. What is really at issue in this discussion is not the details, in numerical terms, of alignments or tally-marks or protractors, but the legitimate limits of inference about the past from its surviving material remains.
  Here we must admit, I think, that in its prehistoric context (and at an earlier date than we have hitherto supposed) Hoyle's interpretation, though more elegant than Hawkins's, is the more diffcult to accept, because it requires on the part of the builders an even greater degree of conceptual abstraction from observed phenomena. This is not to deny, of course, that they possessed a good deal of empirical knowledge of observational astronomy; for we must accept, I think, that the positions at least of the Heel Stone and the Station Stones, and, indeed, the latitude of Stonehenge itself, * are astronomically determined,. even if we agree to differ or to suspend judgement about the precise significance of the alignments involved. Nonetheless, I find myself unable to go all the way with either Hoyle or Hawkins, for the following reasons.
  First, the Aubrey Holes (which were undoubtedly refilled to the surface almost as soon as they had been dug) are very ill-adapted to serve either as permanent tally-marks or as permanent graduations on a large-scale protractor. In either case it would have been suffcient, and easier, merely to bare the required number of patches of chalk subsoil, and thereafter to keep them weeded, as the Ministry's custodians do today for the excavated holes. The digging and refilling of the holes is redundant for either purpose, and has to be explained otherwise. But as soon as it is admitted that the holes can have been dug and
  * Newham and Hawkins have suggested, independently, that the latitude was chosen so that the extreme summer sunrise and moonrise directions would be at right-angles—hence the rectangular figure of the Station Stones.
   In support of this view, it should be noted that only two of the Station Stones are surrounded by ditches analogous to that round the Heel Stone. The latter clearly was always the distant marker.
refilled for a non-astronomical purpose, the case for their astronomical function is thereby weakened. We must remember, moreover, that similar rings of holes containing cremations exist elsewhere, but without ascertainable astronomical significance Moreover, the number of the Aubrey Holes, 56, has no overriding importance, in view of the suggestion by Mr D. H. Sadler that eclipses could be predicted more simply with 47 holes [6], and of the demonstration by R. Colton and R. L. Martin that Hawkins's 56-year eclipse cycle is unsatisfactory for long-term use [7].
  For the alignments, it is essential to think of what would be necessary in practice, and not merely of lines drawn on a plan. The observations are of events on the skyline. For the necessary directional accuracy, two markers are required, as foresight and backsight, and the observer should stand some distance behind the latter. Any other arrangement introduces avoidable errors of observation, which must have been experienced in everyday prehistoric contexts, such as the setting-out of earthworks. Moreover, the sight-line across the tops of both markers should coincide with the horizon or rise only fractionally above it, since all the observations will be made in relatively poor light and, in the 'full-orb' case, against the glare of the sun or moon. But since the horizon of Stonehenge has everywhere a positive elevation, it follows that each alignment could have been observed in these conditions in one direction only. t That in the opposite direction there will be an approximate coincidence with a second extreme azimuth is simply an inevitable consequence of the geometry of the celestial sphere. For this reason I am doubtful of the validity of any argument which includes reciprocal alignments.
  I am equally doubtful of the reality of alignments using holes F, G and H. The excavation of F was never completed, so that its status remains uncertain; but Hawley's description of its filling as 'very hard yellow clayed chalk for about a foot, then dusty powdery and lump chalk to the bottom' reads like that of a typical tree- or bush-hole rather than a stone-hole [8]. Holes G and H were both thought by their excavators to be of a similarly natural origin.
  Of the alignments in Stonehenge Ill, alleged by Hawkins and adopted by Hoyle, I remain wholly sceptical. They depend on subjective estimates of the former positions of fallen and missing stones, in most cases; and even if these were known, there would be an inherent lack of precision in the sight-lines, which can be defined only by centring one gap between stones upon another.
  We must recognize, moreover, that even for Stonehenge I and Il the basis for the accurate estimation of former sight-lines is lacking. The Heel Stone is leaning, and its tip is now displaced several feet from its original position. Of the four Station Stones, only one still stands, as a slightly leaning stump (93). A second (91) has fallen, and a third (92) is represented only by its stone-hole. The position of the hole of the fourth is uncertain. It should be noted in addition that on the sides of 93 there are patches of tooling which extend down to, and at least 6 in. below, the present ground level, which is itself some 18 in. below the ground level in the 2nd millennium B.C. This tooling must, therefore, have been executed before the erection of the stone in its present position; and since such tooling elsewhere on the site is confined to Stonehenge Ill, it is likely that this stone was erected in that period, and replaced, not necessarily accurately, an earlier marker, possibly of timber.
NOTES  We are thus in the position of having to assume values for the basic data, before we can even begin to make further assumptions about how they should be interpreted. In any further discussion, this is the point which needs above all to be borne in mind.
  
(1] ANTIQUITY, 1967, 63.
  [2] G. S. Hawkins, 'Astro-Archaeology', Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory Special Report 226, Cambridge, Mass., 28th October 1966.
  [3] Privately communicated. Some of these have been published by Hawkins, ref. [2] above.
  [4] F. Hoyle, Nature, 211, 1966, 454.
  [5] R. J. C. Atkinson, et al., Excavations at Dorchester, Oxon., 1, 1951, sites I and XI. Two
3. Professor Alexander Thom writes:
Professor Hoyle's paper describes the kind of background knowledge necessary before we can begin to assess (even subjectively) the astronomical significance of a site like Stonehenge.
  In my work I have avoided Stonehenge and concentrated on the hundreds of other important sites in Britain. (Is Avebury not as important as Stonehenge?) This approach, being complementary to a study of Stonehenge, is necessary to an understanding of the knowledge possessed by the erectors. It also has the advantage, when the work is honestly done and honestly reported, that it provides material on which statistical analysis can be based to produce the values sought or to provide a probability level for the acceptance of any particular hypothesis being put forward.
I have found in this as in other branches of
similar rings of pits, without enclosing earthwork, have been excavated recently at Maxey, Northants.
  [6] D. H. Sadler, Nature, 211, 1966, 1120.
  [7] R. Colton and R. L. Martin, Nature, 213, 1967, 475.
  [81 W. Hawley, Diary of the Stonehenge Excavations, 1919—26. Unpublished MS. in Salisbury Museum. The relevant entry is dated 8th August 1923.
science that it is the observation which does not fit preconceived ideas which is often the most rewarding. See, for example, how fruitful is the discussion [1] of those circles whose diameter is not exactly an integral number of megalithic yards. Also note that it was otherwise unexplained but reliable lines which led to the discovery of the megalithic calendar. Somerville in 1912 drew attention to a possible lunar line at Callanish and in my 1955 [2] declination histogram a number of possible lunar lines are to be found. But in the atmosphere of 1955 it would only have complicated the issue to have drawn attention to these lines; I had no proof. But proof came when in 1965 [3] I brought together all the lines collected to that date. The double hump produced by the lunar lines can be seen, one hump for the upper limb and one for the lower. To my mind this was a completely objective proof because the two humps simply appeared without having been expected.
  Today Stonehenge, with an absence or at least a scarcity of distant foresights, cannot show accuracies better than than ±00 '2. I find many sites (enough for a statistical approach) capable of giving, with the indicated mountain profile, an accuracy which often attains 1 minute of arc. Furthermore, at over a dozen places the particular peak or notch required is indicated unambiguously and with slightly less certainty at many others. I have explained in several papers the method available to these people of obtaining at these sites a very high accuracy of solar and lunar positions. I now believe (again by an accidental discovery) I am in a position to prove that the method was so used. The results of analysing the 24 accurate lunar lines known to me at the date of writing are so startling that they must be presented with complete evidence or not at all
  I am glad Professor Hoyle raised the question of basing a statistical determination of probability level on subjective data. My 1955 paper to the Royal Statistical Society shows how I tried to overcome the diffculty with perhaps only partial success. No matter how one draws up terms of reference for the inclusion or exclusion of data the borderline case turns up and may in certain cases affect the answer. But objective proofs do turn up and their validity of course depends on their unexpectedness.
  I do not agree with Professor Hoyle about the uncertainty in megalithic man's equinoxes.
There should be as he says no attempt to define these as 'the day on which the directions of sunrise and sunset differ by 7'. Such a definition would indeed be indefinite, especially in mountainous country. I have shown in several papers that megalithic man's equinox was the day in the spring on which the sun rose on a welldefined mark so chosen that half a year later it again rose on the same mark. This is quite unambiguous and can be applied anywhere. The proof that this was the method used is easy because a consideration of the earth's orbit c. 1800 B.C. shows that on these two days of the year the sun's declination was not zero but about +0 0 '5, and we find good reliable lines showing just this declination. I have also shown that all megalithic man's calendar was based on this pairing of dates so that one mark served for two days in the year. If anyone thinks of the labour involved in erecting the markers, backsights or foresights, he will I think agree that this was an obvious labour-saving method. Any other would also have had the disadvantage of leading to confusion.
NOTES  But in view of my discoveries outwith Stonehenge I am prepared to accept that Stonehenge was a solar and lunar observatory. Why was it necessary to have so many solar and lunar sites? Was Stonehenge becoming the main centre intended to control the others? A central bureaucracy in the south of England was unlikely to be influenced by the plea that a mountainous terrain provided much more opportunity for the accurate determination of lunar and solar periodicities.
  
[1] A. Thom, Megalithic Sites in Britain (1967).
[2] A. Thom, S. R. Statist. Soc., A r 18, 1955, 275. [3] A. Thom (ed. A. Beer), Vistas in Astronomy,
4. Mr C. A. Newham writes:
The idea of the supposed discovery of the near 56-year eclipse cycle, as suggested by Professor Hawkins, now appears untenable. It is discounted by Professor Hoyle, also, according to Drs R. Colton and R. L. Martin (Atkinson [7]), this eclipse cycle as such does not even exist.
vol. 7 (Oxford and New York, 1966).
  [41 A. Thom (ed. A. Beer), Vistas in Astronomy, vol. 12, 1967,
  If the conception of the 56-year eclipse cycle is invalid, so also must be the idea that the Aubrey circle served as a digital 'computer' in this connexion. It seems, therefore, that both ideas are little more than an 'ingenuous flight of imagination'. However, the two original suggestions by Hawkins, to the effect that the Stonehenge people were interested in eclipses and that the Aubrey circle was a kind of protractor, deserve serious consideration.
  Professor Hoyle elaborates the 'protractor idea' by giving in detail a method by which the Aubrey holes could be used to provide the means of judging the time when an eclipse might be expected. Colton and Martin also regard this idea as feasible, especially in relation to other stone circles to be found in Great Britain. However, they intend to submit a further communication suggesting that the Aubreys were used for an entirely different purpose. This could well be so; there seems little doubt that the number 56 was intentional for some special reason. Such a specific number is quite unnecessary for Hoyle's hypothesis, and in my opinion constitutes one of the main weaknesses. Thus far then, there appears to be little to support the idea that the Stonehenge people possessed a high degree of astronomical or mathematical ability.
  Hoyle's suggestion to account for supposed stone alignment errors in those cases where the alignment is a little short of the extreme azimuth, is perfectly valid. The principle is not new. Many early peoples adopted the same method to determine the exact time of the solstices, when the daily shift of sunrise during five to six days before and after the solstice day is almost imperceivable. The method is simple and effective. If this method is applied to the discrepancies found in the Stonehenge sun alignments, then all relevant stones appear to be placed with extreme accuracy. It will, however, require using the first or last gleam of sunrise or setting as the critical sightingpoint, and not the full orb as favoured by Hawkins and Hoyle.
Professor Hoyle goes to considerable length
to justify his statistical approach to the subject. He rightly cautions readers not to accept too readily his reasons for doing so, because the consequences can be far-reaching. By this it is presumed he is referring to his subsequent chain of suggestions. From Table I he produces an impressive list of 'favourable error' in the order of 12 out of the 15 alignments. Now if it is required that the apex of the sighted stone should be in line with the distant horizon, and taking into account the differences in ground levels, then the total of valid alignments must be less than 15. Which alignments will become invalid, or the number thereof, will depend on the choice of one of a possible three combinations. To include reverse alignments relating to any one single line, as Hoyle does, is tantamount to regarding a foot rule as being 24 in. long because it measures 12 in. both ways.
  But apart from the foregoing, the ratio of favourable errors will be different when taken in total. However, if sun and moon errors be shown separately, sun errors will be about the same, but out of a total moon alignments, the favourable errors could be in the minority. I fail to understand why Hoyle applies the same principle of measuring extreme moon azimuths, as those of the sun. There seems no necessity to do so, for unlike the sun, the moon will be observable at its extreme azimuths on a number of occasions during the year of maximum declination.
5. Mr D. H. Sadler, Superintendent of H.M. Nautical Almanac Offce, Royal Greenwich Observatory, whose article 'Prediction of Eclipses' (Nature, 211, 1966, 1119) discussed the theories of Hawkins and Hoyle, has allowed us to print the following brief comment from a letter to the Editor:  Space does not permit the discussion of many facets of the problem. After careful analysis of site evidence, I am of the opinion that if Professor Hoyle had been made aware of all the facts, his approach to the subject would be entirely different. I am sure he would have been able to deduce more simple reasons to account for the activities of the people concerned than he otherwise implies.
  
In my view, the aspect of the suggested use of Stonehenge as 'an eclipse computer' that has not been fully investigated, is how the ancient Britons could have derived, from observations of eclipses, the relationships between the occurrence of eclipses and the directions of risings and settings. A complete analysis requires, first, a list of all eclipses,

both solar and lunar, that could have been observed in clear weather from Stonehenge during the relevant periods and, secondly, their relationship to the various possible critical risings and settings of the sun and moon.
6. Mr R. A. Newall, in a letter to the Editor, writes:  I did make such a study in respect of simple cycles of lunar eclipses and concluded, in spite of many gaps, that it would be possible to deduce the main cycles, provided records were kept. However, the prediction of eclipses, by means of the methods which Hoyle suggests, would require a very much more elaborate investigation, and I think that there is no possibility of my being able to do this in the near future. Ideally, what one would like would be to develop a computer programme which could analyse the list of eclipses, possibly with a built-in random weather factor, relative to the observed rising and setting directions of the Sun and Moon. It would be possible, in principle, to do the analysis with different levels of 'intelligence' and to find out how long it would take at each level to determine empirically the rules which, according to Hoyle, are built into Stonehenge.
  
Congratulations on your publishing papers on Astro-Archaeology and Ascaric-Archaeology in the same number of ANTIQUITY!
  I feel Hawkins and Hoyle would have done far better if they had left out all mention at Stonehenge of the Holes F, G and H. I wrote to both of them before they wrote their papers saying F was an unfinished excavation, therefore I could not say what it was: and G and H were not man-made. If one takes these out from the Table 1, p. 269, that means one third of the alignments are coincidences; and on p. 275 Hoyle uses E. This hole is for the fellow stone to the slaughter stone, but if this alignment is produced it will meet what Hawley called a stone-hole on the inner edge of the ditch.
  As to Table 2, p. 270, I agree the axial alignment in each direction with emphasis on the winter solstice but I am very, very doubtful about all the others; that makes 6 of the 8 doubtful, and a total of 11 doubtful out of 23. That seems a lot. What do you think?
  
Mr Newall, who wrote an article on Stonehenge in the third volume of ANTIQUITY, 38 years ago (1929, 75), has now written a fresh survey which we hope to publish in due course. We have asked Jacquetta Hawkes to summarize and comment on the various views expressed, and there ANTIQUITY must leave Stonehenge for a while.

Scale Models
Plastic archaeological models made to specification.
Robust and weatherproof.
Model of Stonehenge recently used by BBC-2.
John F Randerson 91 Wincheap Canterbury

ANTIQUITY
  
HOYLE ON STONEHENGE: SOME COMMENTS
  
91
  
91
  

  
91
  
