REVIEW	769

gatherer theory. Two related questions can be asked of it: How much of that theory is directly applicable to coastal hunter—gatherers? And if it is to be applicable, how much modification is required? There are perhaps three data-sets in the world which can presently be used to answer those questions; the northwest coast, using the ethnographic and archaeological data in parallel, coastal Jomon (where some work of this kind has already begun) and the Mesolithic. Books such as this one provide the basis for such ambitious comparisons and theory-building.
        KENNETH M. AMES Department of Anthropology
Portland State Urüversity, Portland (OR)
References
KELLY, R.L. 1995. The foraging spectrum: diversity in hunter— gatherer lifeways. Washington (DC): Smithsonian Institution Press.

JOHN NORTH. Stonehenge: Neolithic man and the cosmos. xliv+609 pages, 212 illustrations, 29 plates. 1996. London: HarperCollins; 0-00-255773-8 hardback 25.
The author of this long, scholarly, clearly written and closely argued book is Professor of the History and Philosophy of the Exact Sciences at Groningen University. Because of this, and since his other works include The measure of the universe (1965 and 1995) and The Fontana history ofcosmology and astronomy (1994), he is evidently well-equipped for the task he has set himself here: to examine in detail the large earthwork and stone structures of the Neolithic period in southern England with a view to deciding to what extent their builders were interested in the movements of the celestial bodies (Sun, Moon, planets and stars) and to what extent they incorporated in those structures major architectural features which were orientated towards the rising and setting positions of those bodies.
  In effect North has provided us with another follow-up to Alexander Thom's pioneering work by testing one clear implication of this. If that work is fundamentally sound it is highly unlikely that all the sophisticated geometrical and astronomical work carried out by the stone-circle builders of the later Neolithic started then; it ought to have its origins in the earliest Neolithic monuments and this should be detectable. However, unlike the Thoms, and the authors of most other 'follow-up' works to those, North has familiarized himself with the intricate details of the archaeological evidence and with the interpretations of archaeologists. This book, therefore, though very long and requiring careful reading, may well be the first on the broad theme of 'British archaeoastronomy' that the average prehistorian of the period could open up and immediately feel reasonably confident that he or she is in familiar territory and not confronted with suspicious oversimplifications or partial selections of the evidence.
  In essence North argues that we cannot avoid considering the role the sky played in the rituals and beliefs of the Neolithic architects because their monuments of various kinds are clearly not randomly orientated but favour certain directions. Since this clustering can only happen over a wide area if celestial reference points are used, these are likely to be detectable in the structures. One must then ask: which celestial bodies are likely to have been watched; what degree of accuracy was involved and what observing techniques were used; what was the purpose of this interest; and finally what light this sheds on the social structure of the Neolithic communities concerned?
  It is impossible in a review of this length to do proper justice to a work of this magnitude and detail so this reviewer, hoping to convey a fair impression, will comment only on two of the twelve long sections which follow an Introduction. These sections are; 2 The long barrows, 3 Cursus and enclosure, 4 Stars in chalk (concerned with the hill figures) , 5 Sun and moon (mainly astronomical), 6 Avenue and row, 7 Treehenge and Aubrey circle, 8 The great treehenges (including Woodhenge, Durrington Walls, etc.), 9 Stonehenge astronomy — a historical prologue, 10 Stonehenge — an inventory, 11 The first three Stonehenges, 12 Lozenge and calendar and 13 Ritual and belief. There are also appendices on various technical matters including dating and archaeoastronomical terminology.
770	REVIEW  Sections 7 and 8 discuss the complex circular wooden structures on the assumption that these were indeed 'treehenges' — circles of posts with continuous rows of wooden lintels joining the tops. The edges of the upright posts and the level wooden lintel edges can then be assumed to mark various sighting lines to celestial rising and setting positions. Yet the 'treehenge' interpretation of Woodhenge, Durrington Walls and the rest is not the only or even the most plausible one. The Durrington Walls report argues that the rings were for huge, roofed roundhouses and the site yielded clear evidence for this in the presence of riverine mollusc shells which are only likely to have got there in bundles of reeds to be used for thatch. This reviewer would argue further the admittedly minority view that the large quantities of what looked like domestic refuse in the ditch terminaL(also found in the ditch at Woodhenge) could mean that the round-houses were the permanently inhabited residences and training centres of a priestly class. None of this is mentioned by North (not, apparently, because he has not consulted the relevant works — see his bibliography for chapter 7 and p. 525) and we are left with the impression that the open-air, lintelled wooden sanctuary is the only interpretation. This is not to say that sight-lines to the horizon could not have existed inside roofed roundhouses (through openings in the wall) but sighting lintels would seem to be highly unlikely here and much of North's argument depends on these.
  The long chapter on the long barrows is especially interesting, being the first serious attempt to bring these structures into the new picture of Neolithic Britain. Numerous interesting and often plausible ideas are offered, such as the idea that the trapeze shape of many of the barrows may be due to the builders' desire to mark with the long sides the rising of an important star in one direction and the setting of another in almost the opposite one. Also intriguing is the way the indicated declinations matching the prehistoric positions of Deneb and other stars seem to fit the available corrected 14C dates very well.
  Yet some things are not altogether clear. One can accept stellar orientations built into long-barrow architecture for ritual reasons but the suggestions for practical star-watching raise questions. Standing in a long barrow ditch and watching a star appear or disappear over the ridge of the mound, or over the ridge of the roof of the earlier mortuary structure, is a_n ingenious device to overcome the high extinction angle of even bright stars (they are not bright enough to remain visible right down to a low horizon), but the distance from eye to artificial horizon is not going to be more than about 12 m (figure 24). A fixed post with an eyehole for the observer and a carefully cut wooden notch on the barrow ridge would have been needed to pinpoint the star position with any accuracy. And to what end? The stars don't move their real positions perceptibly within an individual's lifetime and cannot therefore give dates unless heliacal risings or settings were marked, and alignments are not essential for determining these.
  The author's narrative style also presents a problem in evaluating his alignment hypotheses. Surely this is one area in which the statistical approach of the Thoms should have been used? We need tables of all the indicated lines in the barrows (and other sites) with the declinations so marked, including those which seem clear in the structure but fail to point to anything 'interesting' in the sky. Some indication of the probability of such lines hitting celestial targets by chance is also needed, at least for a sample of sites. Only thus can one assess the plausibility of North's case in a dispassionate manner. At present it is difficult to see how very much of it can be tested.
  Despite these reservations this is a book full of carefully thought-out arguments and valuable potential insights that no-one seriously interested in the British Neolithic should avoid confronting.
EUAN W. MACKIE
Hunterian Museum, University of Glasgow
E.W.MacKie@museum.g1a.ac.uk
CHRISTOPHER TILLEY. An ethnography of the Neolithic: early prehistoric societies in southern Scandinavia. xx+363 pages, 190 illustrations, 34 tables. 1996. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press; 0-521-560969 hardback E50 & $79.95,
Southern Scandinavian archaeology has a more than 150-year-long tradition of Late Mesolithic and Neolithic research. Elements of the region 's rich archaeology, such as the flint artefacts, the kitchen middens, the megalithic monuments and the Jutish Single Grave Culture, have long held a central position in European archaeology, and are among the best documented anywhere. This virtually classic material has been immensely enriched during the last 30 years through new finds (e.g. Mesolithic cemeteries, Neolithic grave types, domestic sites, cult houses, causewayed camps and votive deposits), new methods and developing approaches. This material is surely well-suited for developing understandings of prehistoric ritual, symbolism, gender relations, landscape, economics and politics. There are several in_novative studies ill Danish and Swedish archaeology that deal with these themes. It is, therefore, all the more striking that there are virtually no recent, comprehensive syntheses of this region's Neolithic archaeology that transgress boundaries imposed by archaeological find categories, research traditions, and regional and national borders.
  Christopher Tilley's An ethnography of the Neolithic provides us with a much-needed, generally readable synthesis of the Late Mesolithic and the Early to Middle Neolithic A period (the Funnel Beaker culture — TRB). It is perhaps a reflection on both British and Scandinavian archaeology that this book was not written by a Dane or a Swede. The book is organized along familiar lines: the evidence and relevant literature is first reviewed, usually in relation to the four regions of Bohuslän, Västergötland, Skåne and greater or lesser parts of Denmark; patterns are then established; comparisons between the regions are made and interpretations are forwarded. Initially the book presents and discusses the Mesolithic evidence, attempting to interpret the social and symbolic fabric of that period. The book then traces historical and regional developments through the Neolithic, emphasizing symbolic and political dimensions, and the active nature of material culture. The human body as a metaphor is also a recurring theme. Titles such as 'The original affluent society', 'Monument construction and social competition', 'Settlement, tomb and landscape', 'Death and body symbolism' and 'Neolithic politics and a religion of the body' are accurate signals of what the chapters contain. In addition to the sections explicitly about Scandinavian prehistory, the introduction and an epilogue provide considerations about archaeology and anthropology, writing archaeology and developing a theory of material culture.
