REVIEW
  
are supported by the documentary history. However, it remains hypothetical where precisely the church of 1004 was located, and whether it physically influenced the later architectural developments only further excavation can test this. The 12thcentury church is the major surviving monument of Romanesque art in this region (others having been demolished in the 16th century), and the publication of a detailed summary of Halsey's unfinished doctoral research on it is particularly welcome: he demonstrates that the main building was commenced c. 1160—65 and represents the up-to-date fashion of the period, rather than a retardatory design of the 1190s. Other major subject areas covered are: a defended enclosure near Oxford which may be a prehistoric site, or an Anglo-Saxon monastic site, or both; the Medieval timber roofs and floor tiles of the Priory; Wolsey's bell-tower and the later staircasetower of Christ Church.
  The volume is to be commended to all who have an interest in medieval architecture and in the history of Oxford.
RICHARD GEM

JULIAN RICHARDS. The Stonehenge Environs project. xiv + 297 pages, 160 illustrations, 137 tables, 2 microfiches. 1990. London: Historic Buildings & Monuments Commission for England (Archaeological Report 16); ISSN 0953-3796, ISBN 1-85074-269-3 paperback E36.
The decision to carry out an archaeological landscape appreciation of the Stonehenge Environs, taken in 1979, owes much to the wisdom, foresight and the excellent planning of a number of people in what were, at that time, the Inspectorate of Ancient Monuments, DOE, and the Wessex Regional Unit. The trigger for the project was the publication (RCHM(E) 1979) of the detailed assessment of all surface-visible remains in the immediate neighbourhood of Stonehenge by the Royal Commission for the Historical Monuments (England).
  Thus is this great monument being progressively and properly placed and studied within its setting. With the publication of this book, set beside its RCHME precursor, the first stage in a renewed understanding and reinvigorated appreciation of the monument, and of the landscape of which it forms a part, has been achieved. Two further stages remain to be brought to fruition, both of which are happily, we understand, in hand. First is the drawing together of the excavated evidence from Stonehenge itself and its detailed publication; without this, the achieved study of the monument's setting is without its focal jewel. Secondly and finally, particularly with the achievement of this latter objective, the difficulties that for years have prevented any appropriate and sensitive solution to the problems of the public explanation, interpretation and display of Stonehenge must be resolved. Until now delay has been 'forgivable' on the basis that the sound academic and, indeed, the firmly-based, broader contextual, analysis of the site has not been available. Soon, we hope, this will no longer be true. From that moment, that which is unfortunate will become unacceptable.
  This book is a worthy milestone on the road. Julian Richards has faced with great competence the tricky task of stitching a patchwork of 20 separate excavations and 750-odd ha of field survey into a wellarticulated and coherent account. That account is summarized in the final chapter which, period by period, sets out the broad developments in the area. More unusually, this pattern has been successfully negotiated by Richards with his specialists, so that they have also arranged their material in this manner with the consequent 'user-friendly' effect. As a consequence an amount of detail has been 'relegated' to microfiche with a good sense of balance and proportion.
  Of the many features of interest which characterize this campaign of field survey and excavation some can be singled out that render the volume an important one. The Coneybury 'Anomaly' (the restricted range of archaeological description seems but a poor excuse for this infelicity in a published account — whatever it might have been called during the excavation) was a very substantial pit. 2 m in diameter x 1 m deep, the existence of which was indicated by geophysical survey to be just to the northwest of the Coneybury henge monument. The instance does demonstrate one of the inevitable difficulties into which the chronological layout of the volume leads writer and reader, in that the section dealing with this early pit gives no indication of its broader location, for which we have to await the Coneybury henge account some 90 pages further on. Some duplication of basic plans, it seems to the reviewer, is a necessary price to pay (and a worthwhile one) for this otherwise valuable arrangement. The 'Anomaly' presents one of the very few instances in the British Isles where, at a date early in the 4th millennium BC, evidence exists of the coexistence of mobile and sedentary economies with pottery also reflecting a very early stage in Neolithic development. It is always easy to carp with hind.sight but the reviewer cannot conceal his dis.. appointment that, faced with this unrivalled opportunity, the area was not more widely explored  we are necessarily left with a sense of 'what might have been'. Nevertheless the one pit is of consuming interest with the emergence of a picture of slow landscape modification in the earlier Neolithic from this and other sources.
REVIEW	431In the later Neolithic the excavation of the site at Coneybury must form an important new development. Again with hindsight, it is all too easy to express the disappointment inevitably felt at the use of a sampling policy which denies us a full view of the internal timber structures at Coneybury. These internal structures are, perhaps, a single or a succession of, architectural entities. To expose a random part of this cannot be justified on grounds of cost (the on-cost of total excavation of the interior of such a small monument would have been minimal) nor on the 'next generation' argument (the site has been very heavily ploughed and, I gather, has continued to be). It would seem doctrinaire to insist upon 'sampling' in such an instauce where the result is the denial, for the foreseeable future, of the plan of this monument. Field-sampling is a strategy to allow the location of archaeological foci, not a means for the sensible analysis of those foci once located — unless, of course, their nature (e.g. in the case of middens) is an apparently random one. Sampling a non-random construction offers little to the on-looker — better not to touch it at all.
  In the late Bronze Age the sampling of linear ditch systems on Wilsford Down offers some very interesting insights into land-use development which culminated in an extraordinarily rich depiction of local landscape development up to the Iron Age (see figure 155).
This series of reports	the English Heritage Archaeological Reports — of which this represents the 16th has been no mean achievement in English Heritage's seven years of existence and Dr Stephen Johnston deserves much credit for having so effectively guided the series in to what is clearly now a well-established and highly successful mode.
                              ROGER MERCER Royal Commission on the Ancient and Historical Monuments of Scotland, Edinburgh
Reference
RCHM(E). 1979. Stonehenge and its environs. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.

CHRISTOPHER CHIPPINDALE, PAUL DEVEREUX, PETER FOWLER, RHYS JONES & TIM SEBASTIAN. Who owns Stonehenge? 176 pages. 1990. London: Batsford; ISBN 0-7134-6455-0 €12.99.
Poor Stonehenge! For such an important monument — unique not only in Britain but in Europe — Stonehenge has not received the sympathetic treatment it so richly deserves. The efforts of successive generations to improve its condition and presentation have mostly failed. The extensive excavations undertaken intermittently throughout this century remain largely unpublished — a blot on the cultural record of this
  
ARCHAEOMETRY
The prime research journal for the archaeologist interested in the involvement of the physical sciences in archaeology and art history. Articles are written with the non-specialist in mind while Research Notes provide state-of-the-art specialist reports.
The February 1991 issue includes: English porcelains ... Principal component analyses of glass compositions ... Dating time-since-death of oyster shells ... Distinguishing European trade copper and north-eastern North American native copper ... The structure of oriental lacquer by nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy ... Detection of cadmium in gold/silver alloys ...
Proto-Campanian and A-Campanian ceramics ... Thermal archaeological surveying . Radiocarbon dates from the Oxford AMS system ...
Subscription price volume 33: €22 in Europe & US$ 55 elsewhere; personal prices €16 & $38. Payment by cheque or credit card (Visa, Access, Master, Euro, Amex).
