ANTIQUITY, LVI, 1982
A Maya metal-worker's tool from Belize
KAREN OLSEN BRUHNS & NORMAN HAMMOND
 This interesting account of the first metal-worker's tool identified from the Maya area is a joint composition. Karen Olsen Bruhns is Professor of Anthropology at San Francisco State University, San Francisco, CA 94132, USA, and a specialist in Intermediate Area archaeology. Norman Hammond, already known to our readers, is Director of the Archaeology Program at Rutgers University, New Brunswick, NJ 08903, USA ; he has been working on Maya prehistory in Belize since 1970.
  
The civilizations of prehispanic America never advanced technologically beyond the early bronze age: although both the Inca and the Aztec had tools and some weapons of cast bronze, the warriors that fought Cortes used swords edged with obsidian blades. The Classic Maya, who flourished in the first millennium AD, had only a casual acquaintance with metal until the ninth century (Bray, 1977) and raised the great temples of Tikal with an engineering capability no greater than that of the builders of Stonehenge.
  The earliest metalwork found in Maya sites is of exotic manufacture, imported from Costa Rica or Panama, and the knowledge of metallurgy itself arrived through the existing exchange network during the Late Classic period (AD 600—900) when Maya civilization reached its apogee and then collapsed. The transition from importation to local manufacture, and the relationship between metalworking and commerce, have been obscured by a paucity of evidence for the loci and techniques of fabrication, although the end products themselves provide valuable information on the latter and the occasional wasters on the former. The object which we describe below is, to the best of our knowledge, the first metal-worker's tool identified from the Maya Area : its context and material are of interest.
ALBITE OBJECT FROM MOHO CAY, BELIZE
The artifact in question was collected by Fr John Mayer, SJ, during his regular searching of the shallow water on the north side of Moho Cay, a small mangrove island lying offshore at the mouth of the Belize River, just north of Belize City on the Caribbean coast of Central America (FIG. 1). The island has been known archaeologically for more than a century (Franks, 1876), and because of the large numbers of manatee bones found was interpreted as a station for the hunting and butchering of this large marine mammal (Gann, 1911, 78). A brief reconnaissance by Hammond and Peter J. Schmidt, then Archaeological Commissioner, in 1970 showed that much of the site had been submerged by erosion or marine encroachment; from the mid-1970s onwards Maher regularly prospected offshore, and recovered a large quantity of archaeological material which is stored at St John's College, Belize City.
  In 1978 staff of the Cuello Project working in Belize drew, photographed and described much of the collection (Ball, 1978; Wilk, 1978; Hammond, 1978, field notes); among the polished stone artifacts examined by Hammond a small greenstone object was recognized as probably having been a metal-worker's hammer (FIG. 2). By courtesy of the College and the Archaeological Commissioner (Mr Harriot W. Topsey) it was taken on loan to the United States for study.
  Petrological examination (by Dr Paul Desautels, US National Museum, Smithsonian Institution) shows it to be of albite, an ultrabasic metamorphic rock which is a close congener of jadeite; it is hard, dense and extremely tough. The principal, if not the only, Mesoamerican source of albite lies in the Motagua River valley of southern Guatemala, some 350km southwest of Moho Cay and upstream from the major Classic Maya site of Quirigua (Hammond, et al., 1977 ; Coleman, 1980).
  The object is barrel-shaped, with a smoothlypolished surface, 5-3cm high, 4.2cm in diameter in
  
175

Fig. r. Central America and northern Colombia, showing relevant sites and areas
  
midsection and 3cm in diameter at the ends. In the centre of one end is a conical depression I.ocm in diameter and o.7cm deep, with a rounded bottom, formed by rotary drilling. It weighs 156 gm. Although to the best of our knowledge unparalleled in the Maya Area, the object is quite similar to artifacts from lower Central America and South America which are usually identified as metalworking tools on the basis of form, context and historical descriptions. The chronology of these objects is unfortunately usually imprecise, due to their recovery by guaqueros in clandestine excavations.
  One set of metal-working tools with a clear archaeological context is however known, from the central highlands of Peru. They were found within a pair of stone bowls set lip-to-lip at the site of Muyu Moqo, Department of Andahuaylas, and date to c. 1800 BC (Grossman, 1972 ; pers. comm. to Bruhns). There are three polished stone hammers, similar in form and weighing respectively 102gm, 65-5gm and 58.5gm, and a stone anvil. Several pieces of gold foil were closely associated. Similar objects from clandestine excavations are known from the central coast of Peru (Lothrop, 1950 ; 1953). The Moho Cay object is most similar in size to the largest of the Muyu Moqo hammers but is quite different in shape.
  The closest match for the Moho Cay hammer, in form, is a small example of unknown weight from Colos6 on the Caribbean coast of Colombia, pertaining to either the conquest period Tairona or Sinu culture (Jones & Bray, 1974, No. 197 ; Bray, 1978, No. 43a—b). The form and finish are the same as that from Moho Cay, but the Colos6 hammer is slightly smaller and lacks the depression in one end. Both specimens closely fit the description of
	A MAYA METAL-WORKER'S TOOL FROM BELIZE	177
	(a)	
	(c)	(d)
10 cm
Fig. 2. Profile (a), section (b), end (c) and oblique (d) views of the Moho Cay albite object. 1 : r
(Drawn by Paul Stempen)Oviedo y Valdés (1959, Vol. Ill, 11) of the hammers used in metallurgy in northern Colombia in the sixteenth century, as being of black stone and 'the size of eggs or smaller'.
  A graded series of magnetite hammers of similar form, brought to our notice by Dr Warwick Bray, are reported from Saloa, Depto Magdalena, not far to the south in Colombia (Reichel-Dolmatoff & Dussan de Reichel, 1953, Pl. xii, Nos. 38—42, 15); Bray notes that the reports of worked and unworked gold fragments found, like the hammers, in surface deposits at Saloa suggest that it is a metal-working centre.
  On the basis of its own characteristics and of the comparative material we therefore identify the Moho Cay albite object as a metal-worker's hammer, used for thinning and smoothing sheet copper, tumbaga or gold and for raising small bosses on such sheets by using the circular depression in one end as a matrix. Small hemispherical or conical bosses are a very common decorative device on sheet metal artifacts of the Terminal Classic and Postclassic periods after AD 800 in both the Maya Area (e.g. Lothrop, 1936; 1950; Bray, 1977) and the Intermediate Area of lower Central America and northwestern South America. They occur in several standard sizes, the smallest apparently formed simply by the pressure of an engraving tool but the larger ones showing signs of having been formed in a matrix like that on the Moho Cay hammer.
DATING THE MOHO CAY HAMMER
None of the archaeological material recovered by Maher from the shallow water off Moho Cay has any stratigraphic context. The ceramics analysed by Ball (1978) indicate that the principal occupation of the island was during the period AD 400— 750, the latter part of the Early Classic and the first half of the Late Classic (or, in some recent terminologies, the Middle Classic) period. Small quantities of Late Formative pottery of the period 400 BC—AD 250 attest an earlier occupation, and Postclassic incensario and red slipped ware fragments indicate use in at least the Early Postclassic, c. AD 1000—1200 (Ball, 1978, 1). The Classic period pottery from the site is most closely linked with northern Belizean styles, rather than as might be expected with the Belize River valley. NonBelizean pottery indicates ties with such similiar offshore sites as Jaina and Isla Piedras on the Campeche coast, and also contact with northeastern Peten.
  The chipped stone assemblage which forms a substantial part of the collection made by Maher reflects similar contacts and chronology (Wilk, 1978) : the numerous plano-convex stemmed points are a common north Belizean product from (and especially in) the Late Formative, while the ovate biface axes and tranchet adzes are made at factory sites, such as Colha, throughout the Classic period also. The chert of which they are made, in most cases a dark grey variety, comes from the mainland, and the absence of debitage specific to stemmed point and tranchet adze manufacture suggests that they were brought out to Moho Cay as finished goods. Although the points could have been used for manatee hunting and butchering, the lack of use-wear on most of them and the large number suggest that they were destined for onward shipment. The presence on Mobo Cay of such exotic materials as obsidian, vesicular basalt metates for corn-grinding, and chloromelanite polished axes (all originating in the highlands of Guatemala), granite metates from the Maya Mountains in southern Belize, and blue jade, from an as yet unknown source, indicate that this small island received goods from afar. The nature of the site and its location off the mouth of a major river led Hammond (1976, 78) to suggest a function as an entrepÖt on a maritime canoe trade route, where bulk would be broken and goods transhipped into smaller river-going canoes for passage inland. Survey and excavation on the land part of the site by Heather McKillop in 1979 (Healy & McKillop, 1980; McKillop, 1980) confirmed the previous assessments of the periods of use and range of functions of the cay, but the continuation of work in 1980 was prevented by the destruction of the site to build a yacht marina.
  The metal-worker's hammer is not out of place in this range of non-local goods, nor in the context of an east coast maritime trading establishment: the source of its raw material in the Motagua valley lies on a logical major trade route from the highlands to the sea and then up the Caribbean coast, which seems to have been used for the distribution of obsidian from the Ixtepeque source (Hammond, 1972) and jade from the Motagua sources (Hammond, et al., 1977). Its date remains, however, problematical: there are two conflicting possibilities, (a) AD 400—750, based on the major period of occupation at Moho Cay indicated by the pottery, and (b) AD 900—1500, based on the presence in the Maya Area of metalwork made and decorated with similar tools. The presence of Postclassic pottery on Moho Cay shows that (b) is tenable in terms of siteuse within the period AD 1000—1200 also; the relative merits of the two periods may be further assessed by placing the hammer within the broader context of Maya lowland metallurgy.
METALWORK IN THE MAYA LOWLANDS
This topic has been recently and ably discussed by Bray (1977), who concluded that all metal objects of pre-Terminal Classic date (i.e. before c. AD 800) found in the Maya Area, with the possible exception of some gilded copper discs from the Soconusco region of the Pacific coast, were imported as finished goods from the Intermediate Area to the southeast, with the closest centre of manufacture being in Costa Rica. Metallurgy seems to have reached Costa Rica only in the Early Classic period (AD 250—600) from areas of origin in the Central Andes (Bruhns, n.d.; Root, 1961).
A MAYA METAL-WORKER'S TOOL FROM BELIZE	179  At this time the Maya seem also to have obtained access to these new products; the tumbaga clawpendant of c. AD 500 from Altun Ha (Pendergast, 1970', 1979, 151) is the earliest clear piece of evidence, hut is an isolated find: the process of diffusion ato the Maya lands and the organization of metal-vv•orking at this time remain unknown. The sporadic distribution of early metal objects in the Maya Area may be seen as the northernmost extension of a network of exchange of luxury and display items between members of hereditary élites (Helms, 1979). Such a marginal fusion of two interaction spheres would accord with the archaeological evidence for the nature of exchange in both the Intermediate Area and the Maya lowlands, since it is becoming clear that much of Maya internal 'trade' was concerned with the movement of sumptuary goods for political and diplomatic rather than purely economic purposes (e.g. Ball,
n.d.).
DISCUSSION
Larger-scale imports of metal objects by the Maya, followed by the introduction of local metallurgy in the Terminal Classic and Early Postclassic may be related in part to the expansion of maritime commerce by the Putun Maya (Thompson, 1970; Sabloff & Rathje, 1975). The use of large sea-going canoes, such as that encountered in 1502 by Columbus near the Bay Islands, has not been proved for earlier periods, but the evidence of increasing contact with regions as distant as Costa Rica and Panama supports it, since the small canoes used on inland waterways and known from drawings and models would have been uneconomical, if not unsuitable, for such lengthy voyages. The very existence of such small offshore stations as Moho Cay and Wild Cane Cay (Hammond, 1975, 277—82), with their wide ranges of exotic and valuable goods, is circumstantial evidence for organized maritime trade and the need for secure transhipment points, and the sheer quantities of some commodities—far more than the small resident populations can have needed for personal use—are presumably from warehoused stocks that never passed onwards. Others, including the heavily used chert axes, may have been employed in ancillary industries such as canoe building (Wilk, 1978, 6); Maher's discovery of chert debitaae on some parts of the surface of Moho Cay sug-
Acknowledgements : We are grateful to Fr John Maher, S], for allowing us to publish the Moho Cay hammer, and for arranging the loan of it for study; to Mr Harriot W. Topsey, Archaeological Commissioner of Belize, for facilitating the temporary removal of the object from Belize; to Dr Paul Desautels for identifying the material and to Dr George Stuart for arranging for this; to
gests the reworking of tools (while the lack of nodules and cortical flakes rules out their initial manufacture).
  This apparent röle of Moho Cay as an entrepÖt makes it a reasonable place in which to find evidence of metal-working and its practitioners. The itinerant life of such specialists in many societies has been remarked on (e.g. Rowlands, 1976; Spratling, 1973) and has been suggested as having applied in the Maya Area also (Bray, 1977). The extent to which such a model is compatible with the organization of Classic Maya civilization at its apogee needs further consideration, however, although it is not incongruent with Helms's (1979) model of élite exchange as an explanation for the initial introduction of metal goods to the Early Classic Maya.
  In the more commercially oriented society of the Terminal Classic and Postclassic periods, with at the same time a decline in political centralization in the southern lowlands, a travelling metalsmith seems perfectly plausible: since the raw material of the Moho Cay hammer is apparently of Maya Area origin, and the manufacture of the tool inferentially so, we conclude that the hammer probably dates from this period, when native Maya metalworking is first indicated. The derivation of the tool from an Intermediate Area model raises the (unanswerable) question of the origin of the person who had it made and used it; it also shows that such a craftsman could have not only created the distinctively Toltec-Maya repoussé decoration on the gold discs from the Sacred Cenote at Chichén Itzå, but also made the discs themselves, which have been commonly thought (Lothrop, 1952 ; Bray, 1977, 381, 397) to have been imported as blanks from Costa Rica or Panama. As recently as 1977 Bray considered the evidence of metal-working actually within the Maya lowlands to be still 'circumstantial', although he concludes that 'it would be surprising if the skills remained unknown in the Petén and Yucatan' (Bray, 1977, 397, 398). The Moho Cay hammer, of Maya Area material and provenance, may perhaps help to make the circumstantial conclusive.
Dr Joseph W. Ball and Dr Richard Wilk for allowing use of their unpublished assessments of the Moho Cay pottery and stonework; and to Messrs H. A. Shelley and Paul Stempen for drawing FIGS. 1 and 2 respectively. The 1978 study of the Moho Cay collection from which this note derives was paid for by a grant from the Research Council of Rutgers University.
BIBLIOGRAPHYBALL, J. w. 1978. The ceramic history of Moho Cay, Belize. MS on file at Archaeological Research Program, Rutgers University; Archaeology Dept., Belmopan; Anthropology Dept., Trent University. n.d. Ceramics and Central Mexican highland—Maya lowland Classic Periodical social interactions: a theoretical perspective. Paper presented at Dumbarton Oaks Symposium on Interdisciplinary Approaches to Mesoamerican HighlancVLowland Interaction, October 1980, Washington, D.C. MS on file, San Diego State University, Dept. of Anthropology.
BRAY, w. M. 1977. Maya metalwork and its external con. nections, in (ed.) Norman Hammond, Social Process in Maya prehistory : studies in honour of Sir Eric Thompson (London), 365—403.
1978. The gold of El Dorado (London),
BRUHNS, K. o. n.d. Metalurgia prehispanica de Colombia : una breve reseia. Paper presented at the Segundo Congreso del Hombre y la Cultura Andina, 1974, Trujillo, Peru; on file at San Francisco State University, Dept. of Anthropology.
COLEMAN, R. G. 1980. The natural occurrence of jade and its bearing on Mesoamerican jade artifacts. Paper presented at the Dumbarton Oaks Symposium on Mesoamerican Jades, December 1980, Washington, D.C.; on file at Stanford University, Dept. of Geology.
FRANKS, A. W. 1876. On stone implements from Honduras, and Turks and Caicos Islands, JRAI, VI, 37—40.
GANN, T. w. F. 1911. Exploration carried out in British Honduras during 1908—1909, Liverpool Annals of Archaeology and Anthropology, IV, 72—87.
GROSSMAN, J. W. 1972. An ancient gold worker's tool kit: the earliest metal technology in Peru, Archaeology, 25, 270—5•
HAMMOND, N. 1972. Obsidian trade routes in the Mayan area, Science, 178, 1092—1093.
1975. Lubaantun : A Classic Maya realm. Monographs of the Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology, Harvard University, 2 (Cambridge, Mass.).
1976. Maya obsidian trade: new data from southern Belize, in (eds) Thomas R. Hester and Norman Hammond, Maya lithic studies : Papers from the 1976 Belize field symposium (San Antonio), 71—81.
HAMMOND, N.. A. ASPINALL, S. FEATHER, J. HAZELDF.N, T, GAZARD & S. ARGELL, 1977. Maya jade: source location and analysis, in (eds) T. Earle and J. Ericson, Exchange systems in prehistory (New York), HEALY, P. & H. MCKILLOP. 1980. Moho Cay, Belize: a preliminary report of the 1979 archaeological season, Belizean Studies, 8 no. 6, 10—16.
HELMS, M. w. 1979. Ancient Panama : Chiefs in search of power (Austin).
JONES, J. & w. M. BRAY. 1974. El Dorado: The gold of ancient Colombia (Greenwich, Conn.).
LOTHROP, s. K. 1936. Zacualpa: A study of ancient Quiché artifacts, Carnegie Institution of Washington Publication 472 (Washington, D.C.). 1950. Metal working tools from the central coast of Peru, American Antiquity, 16, 160—4.
J 953. Metals from the Cenote of Sacrifice, Chichén Itzå,
Yucatan. Memoirs of the Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology, Harvard University, 10 no, 2 (Cambridge, Mass.).
MCKILLOP, H. 1980. Moho Cay, Belize: Preliminary investigations of trade, settlement, and marine resource exploitation. M.A. thesis, Dept. of Anthropology, Trent University.
OVIEDO Y VALDES, G. F. de. 1959. Historia generalynatural de las indias, islas y tierra-firme de) mar oceano (Madrid).
PENDERGAST, D. M. 1970. Tumbaga object from the Early Classic period, found at Altun Ha, British Honduras, Science, 168, 116—18. 1979. Excavations at Altun Ha, Belize, 1964—1970, Volume J (Toronto).
REICHEL-DOLMATOFF, C. & A. DUSSAN de REICHEL. 1953. Investigaciones Arqueologicas en el Departamento de Magdalena, Colombia, 1946—1950, 111, Divulgaciones Etnoldgicas, 111, No. 4, 1—98.
ROOT, w. c. 1961. Pre-columbian metalwork of Columbia and its neighbors, in (eds). S. K. Lothrop and others, Essays in Pre-columbian art and archaeology (Cambridge, Mass.) 42—57.
ROWLANDS, M. J. 1976. The organization of middle bronze age metalworking, BAR 31 (Oxford).
SABLOFF, J. A. & w. L. RATHJE (eds). 1975. A study of changing Pre-columbian commercial systems : The 1972—1973 seasons at Cozumel, Quintana Roo, Mexico. Monographs of the Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology, Harvard University, 3 (Cambridge, Mass.).
SPRATLING, M. 1973. The bronze foundry. Part Il of The iron age settlement of Gussage All Saints, Antiquity, XLVII, 117—30.
THOMPSON, J. E. s. 1970. Maya History and Religion (Norman, Oklahoma).
WILK, R. R. 1978. The Moho Cay lithic collection. MS on file at the Archaeology Program, Rutgers University; Archaeology Department, Belmopan; Dept. of Anthropology, Trent University.
176	ANTIQUITY
  

  

  
