Review
New Book Chronicle
Madeleine Hummler

December’s chronicle concerns Neolithic and Bronze Age Europe, mostly north-western. Megaliths dominate the scene, but settlement and barrow excavations and studies considering the wider landscape are also presented. Different approaches, from analytical to phenomenological, will be evident and their effect on this reader briefly commented on.
Megaliths and other stones
ROGER JOUSSAUME, LUC LAPORTE & CHRIS SCARRE (ed). Origine et d´eveloppement du m´egalithisme de l’ouest de l’Europe/Origin and development of the megalithic monuments of western Europe. Colloque international/International conference, Bougon, 26-30 October 2002. 2 volumes, 832 pages, numerous illustrations & tables. 2006. Bougon: Musee des´ TumulusdeBougon;2-911743-22-9paperback€38.
MAGDALENA S. MIDGLEY. The megaliths of Northern Europe.xiv+226pages,80illustrations.2008.London & New York: Routledge; 978-0-415-35180 hardback £60; 978-0-203-69855-6 e-book.
MARK GILLINGS, JOSHUA POLLARD, DAVID WHEATLEY & RICK PETERSON. Landscape of the megaliths: excavation and fieldwork on the Avebury monuments 1997-2003. xiv+402 pages, 225 illustrations, 83 tables. Oxford: Oxbow; 978-1-84217-313-8 hardback £40.
ROSEMARY HILL. Stonehenge. ii+242 pages, 34 illustrations. 2008. London: Profile Books; 978-186197-865-3 hardback £12.99.
From Poitou-Charente, the fiefdom of Segol´ ene` Royal, come the proceedings of a specialist colloquium convened at the Musee´ des Tumulus de Bougon in 2002. Origine et d´eveloppement du m´egalithisme de l’ouest de l’Europe is by 75 contributors, two thirds French and a third from Britain, Ireland, Belgium, Luxemburg, Switzerland, Portugal, Spain and Morocco. Together they present 52 papers in 800 pages. This is not actually as daunting as it looks: 400 pages really, as the two
ANTIQUITY 82 (2008): 1151–1161
Reviewvolumes are bilingual (about which more below). The first, longer, volume contains chapter 1, dedicated to overviews and reports on the megalithic funerary monuments of Scandinavia and north/north-western Europe, France (including Corsica with Sardinia coopted), the British Isles and the Iberian peninsula. There perhaps the chapter contributed by the late Graham Ritchie makes the best case for not studying megaliths as a separate entity, since megalithic monuments and settlements in timber, earth and stone exist in all combinations in Scotland. If we study megaliths on their own ‘we are studying stamp perforations rather than a broader picture’ (p. 184). Amongst reports on new sites, the complex long mound C of Per´ e at Priss´ e-la-Charri´ ere (Deux-` Sevres) is well presented by Laporte, Scarre and` Joussaume, with good photographs (p. 367) and a summary of its sequence. Among regional specialities, note the small-but-perfect ‘micromonumentality’ from the Lake Geneva region of Switzerland (p. 405) or the fact that there is a type of mud-brick megalithism in the Meseta region of central Spain (p. 442). The shorter volume 2 contains three chapters. That on standing stones demonstrates again thattheyarenotaclassapart,sincethereisamultitude of possible associations and that timber structures or wooden predecessors are part of the phenomenon. Chapter 3 deals with megalithic art, and includes a paper by Bueno Ramirez and Balb´?n Behrmann insisting on the greater number of painted megaliths in Spain, a bit of a demolition job on Shee Twohig’s 1981 overview, The megalithic art of Western Europe. The final section of the book, ‘other megalithisms’, is sparse with just two papers: a presentation of a Moroccan Neolithic (or Iron Age?) complex, and a very brief summary about India. Given the size of the undertaking, some blemishes are inevitable. The editors could have halved their troubles, however, had they decided not to publish a bilingual edition. Indeed, it is often in the translation that problems crop up (though, when Scarre does it himself, it is good): for an example of clumsy translation, see p. 246; some passages do not appear in one of the languages (e.g. p. 175) or sections get out of step with each other (e.g. p. 553-66). Finally the repetition of Bradley’s summary and substitution for O’Sullivan’s (p. 650 = p. 526) is unfortunate. Surely it is not essential to produce a bilingual text, since it will be mainly specialists who will buy the book and they should be able to cope with the three main languages of their area of study. But, as the duplicated set of papers only costs €38, it would be ungracious to complain.
Midgley’s The megaliths of Northern Europe is an enjoyable overview of the megalithic phenomenon further north and east; it concerns the mortuary monuments erected by the communities of the TRB (or Trichterbecher/Funnel Beaker) culture on the North European Plain, from the Netherlands to Poland and from Bohemia to Denmark and southern Sweden between c. 4500/4000 BC and 2900/2700 BC. Though less well known than their Atlantic counterparts these structures are certainly not rare: some 12 000 have been recorded, a small proportion of a once much larger set. Two long chapters (3 and 4, on tomb building and the people represented, in body and ritual) take up half the book, prefaced by two shorter chapters defining the TRB culture and discussing distribution and location; they are followed by two further short chapters discussing symbolism and the place of the northern megaliths within the European megalithic sphere. This short book is clearly written and well illustrated – the line drawings and diagrams are well executed, the photographs (some milky) well chosen. Midgleywritesinalargelyfactualstyle,temperedwith some scepticism when it comes to phenomenological approaches to monumentality; however, she does not shy away from conjecture, in the last chapter for example. Her book shows the enormous variety in local megalithic manifestations while highlighting broader trends: from early agriculture and earthen long mounds, via closed dolmens to more open forms, culminating in passage graves and a shift from individual burial to commemoration of ancestors. One may perhaps have wished for a more extensive discussion of the role of children or of agriculture, and perhaps some more examples from the eastern part of her area of study. Nevertheless, this is an excellent introduction to the subject, making non-specialists feel they can join in the debate.
Landscapes of the megaliths (the title referring to a painting by Paul Nash) is the definitive report of a programme of excavation and survey between 1997 and 2003 centred on Avebury. The greatest part of the work by the Universities of Leicester, Southampton and Wales (Newport), supported by the AHRC and the Society of Antiquaries of London, was around the Beckhampton area, with further fieldwork and excavation in a number of other locations. At Beckhampton the presence of a second avenue was confirmed and much detail could be added to a sequence that brought into play the two long barrows at South Street and Beckhampton, a Late Neolithic open enclosure (the Longstones enclosure), the Avebury circles, the two avenues (West Kennet and Beckhampton with its Cove) joining Avebury, Falkner’s stone circle, the Sanctuary, the West Kennet enclosures and Silbury Hill. This sequence, which saw the most energetic monument building between c. 2600 and 2200 BC, is linked to the environmental conditions prevailing in the landscape between the Neolithic and Bronze Age presented in chapter 5 and supported by a series of detailed colour maps on pp. 185-92. Prehistorians might be tempted to stop reading on p. 224, the end of the prehistoric report proper. But that would be a shame as the post-prehistoric fate of the Avebury landscape, in particular the episodes of stone burying, stone destruction and burning during the later Middle Ages and seventeenth-eighteenth centuries (chapters 9-11) make captivating reading. The analysis and discussion illustrate most eloquently that the continuing story of Avebury and the complex reasons for dismantling parts of it are integral to understanding this monumental landscape. The discussion also highlights how unquestioningly certain interpretations and assumptions (i.e. that the stones were removed out of superstition, or because of the influence of the Christian Church, or simply for land clearance) appear in the secondary literature and are applied uncritically to other situations. The story is more complicated and, it seems, unique to Avebury
(p. 363). GILLINGS, POLLARD, WHEATLEY & PETERSON are to be congratulated on a report that strikes an excellent balance between detailed description, discussion and interpretation. Minor quibbles are that the first map (Figure 1.1) could be more detailed and that the occasional typo has escaped proof reading (e.g. compliment for complement on p. 365).
ReviewROSEMARY HILL quotes Jacquetta Hawkes’s aphorism that every age ‘has the Stonehenge it deserves – or desires’ in her Stonehenge (p. 27). Her own Stonehenge would suggest that the turmoil of recent years has subsided a little, leaving time for new investigations to bear fruit (she brings the story up to Parker Pearson et al.’s 2007 Antiquity article and to Wainwright and Darvill’s intervention of March 2008) and hints that smaller but achievable measures for dealing with Stonehenge as a public monument (p. 197-8) are perhaps no bad thing. Her book is intended for a general readership: 210 pages of text, interspersed by some 30 archival monochrome illustrations, are supplemented by notes on further reading and an index in a small hardback format. Though she pays due attention to the archaeology in chapter 1 and on pages 198-203, this is not her main intention. She is ‘concerned with what the monument is, physically, and what it has meant throughout historic times to those who have considered it, from medievalmonkstomodernarchaeologists’(p.2).This historiography takes us from antiquarians, architects (with a long apologia for Inigo Jones), through Druids (much about them) and New Age festivals to the concerns of present-day heritage managers. All in all, a readable narrative with some interesting asides on the architecture of Bath, Milton Keynes and roundabouts.
Prehistory in the Netherlands
PIETER VAN DE VELDE (ed.). Excavations at Geleen-
Janskamperveld 1990/1991 (Analecta Praehistorica Leidensia 39). ii+278 pages, 164 illustrations, 103 tables. 2007 [2008]. Leiden: Faculty of Archaeology, Leiden University; 978-90-73368-22-4 paperback €55.
HARRY FOKKENS, BRYONY J. COLES, ANNELOU L. VAN GIJN, JOS P. KLEIJNE, HEDWIG H. PONJEE & CORIJANNE G. SLAPPENDEL (ed.). Between foraging and farming: an extended broad spectrum of papers presented to Leendert Louwe Kooijmans (Analecta Praehistorica Leidensia 40). x+286 pages, 105 illustrations, 19 tables. 2008. Leiden: Faculty of Archaeology, Leiden University; 978-90-73368-23-1 paperback €50.
S. ARNOLDUSSEN & H. FOKKENS (ed.). Bronze Age settlements in the Low Countries. iv+202 pages, 150 illustrations, 19 tables. 2008. Oxford; Oxbow; 9781-84217-307-7 hardback £40.
The excavation of 69 Linearbandkeramik houses, radiocarbon-dated to c. 5220-5000 BC at GeleenJanskamperveld in the province of Limburg near Maastricht, a rescue intervention led by Leendert Louwe Kooijmans and colleagues in 1990-91 on a settlement of 4.5 ha, is reported in Analecta Praehistorica Leidensia 39, edited by PIETER VAN DE VELDE, the author of the ceramic studies and the sequencing of the whole site. This thorough report – which also includes a chapter on the Iron Age and Roman remains found there – is an excellent example of the Dutch analytical approach; it manages to tease out much fine detail out of a mass of postholes, wall trenches, outer trenches, quarry pits, storage pits (‘kettle pits’) and palisaded enclosures. This allows the excavators to propose that the settlement consisted of c. 20-25 houses at any one time, organised along ‘virilocal residence rules crossed with matrilinear heritage titles’ (according to the pottery decoration; chapter 15). Each household had around 10 pots, 3 for the table, 4 for cooking and 3 for storage. This level of detail is achieved by impressive analytical and statistical studies, also applied to the archaeobotanical remains and the procurement, distribution and use of flint and stone adzes and querns. The report introduces more subjective elements too, e.g. that the houses were oriented towards Flombornia, ‘the Land of the Ancestors’ (p. 33), or that two ceramic sherds may represent a figurine linked to an ancestor cult (chapter 10), or that querns were ritually decommissioned at the end of their lives (p. 203). Impressive as it is, there are some unsettling aspects to the report. First, the analytical approach leads to segmentation: nowhere, for example, is a whole plan of the excavation with all its features shown. Instead, the report, after preliminary chapters, plunges straight into the presentation of the houses and their development (figures on pp. 34-62). We have to wait until page 71until we are shown the pits and page 81 until we see the palisaded enclosures (but then not the pits). Secondly, it seems that at times the fragility of the archaeological evidence gets forgotteninthegrandanalyticalscheme.Forexample, we are told on p. 79 that 60 (out of 98) ‘kettle pits’ (storage pits) are ‘part of’ 34 Langsbruben¨ (quarry or side pits). This leads to a very short discussion of the relationships between these features, which obviously has implications for their further relationships with the houses. The ambiguity is underplayed later on: on p. 88 the ‘kettle pits’ are ‘cellars’, and a ‘weak tendency towards two (probably non-simultaneous) cellars per house’ is observed, although 38 (out of 69) houses have no storage pits. To evaluate this question,moredetailedplansandparticularlysections (conspicuously absent) of intercutting features should be provided. Nevertheless Geleen-Janskamperveld is a site of huge importance and this report a great achievement.
1151

1151

1151

