392
Megalithic transport and territorial markers: evidence from the Channel Islands
MARK PATTON*
Evidence from the Channel Islands supports the view that long-distance transport of megaliths in the European Neolithic cannot be substantiated. Analysis of the stones at La Hougue Bie, however, shows that megaliths were regularly moved over shorter distances, and suggests that the distribution of megalithic sites within a region cannot be explained simply as a function of the availability of building materials. This view modifies the purely materialistic conclusions of Thorpe & Williams-Thorpe in their recent demolition of the Stonehenge bluestones myth (ANTIQUITY 65: 64—73).

In a recent article, Thorpe & Williams-Thorpe (1991) have questioned the much-quoted evidence for the long-distance transport of megalithic stones in the European Neolithic. The best known example of supposed megalithic transport is the case of the Stonehenge bluestones, whose geological origin lies in the Preseli Hills of southwest Wales, 240 km from Stonehenge. Thorpe & Williams-Thorpe (1991) challenge Atkinson's (1979) assertion that these stones were transported from Wales by human action, suggesting very plausibly that the stones were deposited on Salisbury Plain as glacial erratics. There seems now to be little basis for the assertion that the Stonehenge bluestones were transported to Salisbury Plain by human action, and there is no good evidence for the transport of megalithic stones over very long distances (i.e. over hundreds of kilometres) anywhere in Europe (though Burl 1991 argues convincingly that the Stonehenge sarsens were transported from the Marlborough Downs by human action, over a distance of 38 km). Thorpe & WilliamsThorpe (1991) go on, however, to draw some more general conclusions which should perhaps be questioned. They assert, for example, that there is no evidence for the transport of megaliths from distances exceeding 5 km, that megalith builders invariably utilized 'the simplest & most obvious methods for stone selection, transportation and construction' , and that consequently the locations of megalithic monuments are 'likely to reflect the local availability of building materials rather than the delimitation of contemporaneous tribal territories'. On a macro-regional level, it is almost certainly true that the distribution of megalithic monuments reflects the availability of building materials: this probably accounts for the absence of these monuments from areas such as the Landes (southwest France), the Sologne (north Central France) and East Anglia. The 'territorial marker' hypothesis, however, developed by Renfrew (1973; 1976) and elaborated in subsequent publications by Renfrew and others, does not depend on evidence for longdistance megalithic transport. The evidence from the Channel Islands outlined in this paper is not consistent with the claims of Thorpe & Williams-Thorpe, suggesting that there is more to megalithic distribution than simply the availability of building materials.
Megalithic petrology and distribution in the
Channel Islands
In considering the question of megalithic transport, the evidence from the Channel Islands is particularly important. The islands have an important series of passage graves (Hawkes 1937; Patton 1987; 1990), dating to the Middle Neolithic period (c. 3000—4000 BC): these monuments are built of local igneous rocks, which are relatively easy to characterize, owing to the extremely varied nature of the islands' geology.

 Jersey Museums Service, The Weighbridge, St Helier, Jersey, Channel Islands, UK.
ANTIQUITY 66 (1992): 392-5
393

The islands are also fortunate in having•benefitted for over 50 years from the work of Dr Arthur Mourant, whose research interests span archaeology and geology. In a series of publications, Mourant (1933; 1937; 1963; 1977) has identified the geological sources of most of the stones used for the construction of passage graves in Jersey. The results of this research are summarized by FIGURE 1. These results suggest that most of the island's passage graves are built of stones taken from the immediate area of the monuments themselves, within a radius of 2 km. The passage grave of Les Monts Grantez may incorporate stones from La Corbiöre, over 5 km to the southwest (Mourant 1937), though a closer source cannot be ruled out. The site of La Hougue Bie, however, is more interesting, since it incorporates stones from several points around the eastern half of the island, including sources also used by the builders of the passage graves of Le Mont de la Ville and Le Mont Ubé. These sources are between 1 and 7 km distant from the site of La Hougue Bie itself. The monument of La Hougue Bie occupies a more central position than the other passage graves of Jersey (FIGURE 1) and is also considerably larger (TABLE 1).
  La Hougue Bie is located on high land, on a loess-covered plateau entirely devoid of stones.
The stones of which the passage and chamber are built weigh up to 20 tonnes, and most have been transported up-hill (the sources of the stones are in most cases at sea-level, whereas the site is 86 m above sea-level). It is estimated (Kinnes & Hibbs 1988; Patton 1990) that a minimum labour force of 200 people would have been required to transport the largest stone to La Hougue Bie. Further calculations (Patton
sitediameter oflength ofJerseymoundpassage/ chamberFaldouet33 m14 mGéonnais	20 m
Grantez	unknown
La Hougue Bie	55 m
Le Mont Ubé	unknown
Le Mont de la Ville unknown
La Sergent
Guernsey5.5 mLa Creux-ös-Faies18 m10 mLe Déhus19 m9.3 mLa Varde18 mFIGURE 1. Distribution of passage graves in Jersey, showing sources of stone used (after Patton 1991).
1 La Hougue Bie
2 Faldouet
3 Le Mont Ubé
4 Le Mont de la Ville
5 Les Cinq Pierres
6 La Sergenté
7 Les Monts Grantez
8 La Hougue des
GéonnaisTABLE 1. Dimensions of passage graves in the Channel Islands.
394
1990) suggest that passage graves such as Faldouet, Le Mont Ubé and Le Mont de la Ville may have been built and used by individual communities consisting of 400—600 people. The largest stone at Faldouet, for example, weighs around 24 tonnes (Kinnes & Hibbs 1988) but, unlike the large stones at La Hougue Bie, has been transported along level ground. It. is estimated (Patton 1990) that a team of 120 people would have been required to transport this stone: if we assume that most of the haulage work was done by adult men and (following Hedges 1983) that adult men constituted around 23% of the population, we arrive at a figure of 530 as the minimum size of the Neolithic community which built the Faldouet passage grave. The size and location of La Hougue Bie, together with the petrological evidence discussed by Mourant, suggest that this monument was a higher-order centre, serving several of the smaller communities (probably the communities represented by the passage graves of Faldouet, Le Mont Ubé and Le Mont de la Ville). Based on the figures cited above, we would estimate that the La Hougue Bie group consisted of 1500—2000 people. The location of La Hougue Bie is clearly not determined by the availability of building materials, all of which had to be brought to the site from a considerable distance and, in most cases, up-hill. It can be argued, however, that the monument was located at the centre of a larger territory (corresponding to the eastern half ofJersey) and that its location was partly determined by visibility factors (the monument, located on high land, was clearly meant to be visible and can even be seen from the adjacent mainland coast of Normandy). The stones of which the monument is built have not all been brought from the closest source, despite the abundance of granite and diorite at all of the sources used by the builders of the passage grave: the builders seem deliberately to have selected stones from all parts of their 'territory'. In a recent paper (Patton 1991) it is argued that the emergence of a larger ritual centre in the eastern half of Jersey represents a degree of centralization, possibly linked to the control of stone axe exchange.
Discussion
Whilst accepting that there is no good evidence for the long-distance transport of megaliths in the European Neolithic, the Channel Island evidence outlined in this paper suggests that megaliths were transported over shorter distances on a regular basis, and that the distribution of megaliths within a region cannot be explained simply as a function of availability of building materials. If the builders of La Hougue Bie had utilized 'the simplest & most obvious methods for stone selection, transportation and construction', as predicted by Thorpe & Williams-Thorpe (1991: 72), and located according to the availability of materials, the monument would have been built elsewhere. The fact that it was not built elsewhere implies that cultural factors outweighed practical considerations in this case. This appears also to have been the case elsewhere: if the location of megaliths was determined simply by the availability of materials, then the Grand Menhir of Locmariaquer would surely have been erected at source (on the banks of the Auray River) rather than transported 4 km in an operation that would have required an estimated workforce of 3800 people (Hornsey 1987). The technology required to transport a stone over a distance of 7 km is exactly the same as that required to transport it over 500 km, assuming that the terrain includes no steeper slopes. Even the number of people required would be the same; the task would simply take longer. Thorpe & Williams-Thorpe's debunking of the Stonehenge bluestones myth, therefore, important though it undoubtedly is, need not alter our understanding of European megaliths and their builders as dramatically as they seem to imply in their article.
Acknowledgements. I am particularly grateful to Dr Arthur Mourant, for his invaluable work on megalithic petrology in Jersey, and for discussing this research with me in detail. I would also like to thank Dr David Johnston for his helpful comments on a draft of this text: many of the ideas elaborated in this paper had previously been outlined by him in an unpublished paper read to the Prehistoric Society in 1975 and, although I had not seen that paper, our conclusions are in many respects remarkably similar.
References
ATKINSON, R.J.C. 1979. Stonehenge. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
BURL, A. 1991. Megalithic myth or man the mover, Antiquity 65: 297,
HAWKES, J. 1937. The archaeology of the Channel Islands I: The Bailiwick of Jersey. St Helier: Société Jersiaise.
HEDGES, J.W. 1983. Isbister, a chambered tomb in Orkney. Oxford: British Archaeological Reports. British series 115.
HORNSEY, R. 1987. The Grand Menhir Brisé: megalithic success or failure?, Oxford Journal of Archaeology 6: 185—217.
KINNES, I.A. & J.L. HIBBS. The dolmens of Jersey. Jersey: La Haule Books/Channel Television.
MOURANT, A.E. 1933. Dolmen de La Hougue Bie: nature and provenance of materials, Société Jersiaise Annual Bulletin 12: 217—20.
1937. Notes on petrology, in Hawkes 1937: 205—7, 212-3, 225, 238—9, 244-5, 269.
1963. The stones of the Mont de la Ville passage grave, Jersey, Société Jersiaise Annual Bulletin 18: 317-25.
395
1977. The use of Fort Regent granite in megalithic monuments in Jersey, Société Jersiaise Annual Bulletin 22: 41-9.
PATTON, M.A. 1987. Jersey in prehistory. Jersey: La Haule Books.
1990. Neolithic communities of the Channel Islands. Unpublished Ph.D thesis, University of London.
1991. Axes, men and women: symbolic dimensions of Neolithic exchange in Armorica (northwest France), in P. Garwood, D. Jennings, R. Skeates & J. Toms (ed.), Sacred & profane: archaeology, ritual and religion: 65—79. Oxford: Oxford University Committee for Archaeology. Oxford Monographs in Archaeology 32.
RENFREW, A.C. 1973. Before civilisation: the radiocarbon revolution and prehistoric Europe. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
1976. Megaliths, territories and populations, Dissertationes Archaeologicae Gandenses 16: 198-220.

The Snettisham, Norfolk, hoards of Iron Age torques: sacred or profane?
A.P. FITZPATRICK*
The remarkable find of Iron Age gold torques from Snettisham (see ANTIQUITY 65: 447—65) was interpreted by the excavator, Ian Stead, as representing a treasury, 'assigned to the earth for safe-keeping', rather than a votive deposit. This article argues that these are not mutually exclusive categories, since no clear distinction was made in Iron Age Europe between sacred and profane.THORPE, R.S. & O. WILLIAMS-THORPE. 1991. The myth of long-distance megalith transport, Antiquity 65: 64-73.

The September 1991 issue carried a preliminary account by I.M. Stead of the hoards of Iron Age gold torques discovered in the excavations by the British Museum at Snettisham, Norfolk, Great Britain (Stead 1991). Five hoards had been discovered in the 1950s and further torques were found in the 1960s. The discovery of another hoard by a metal-detector user led to the latest excavations. The acquisition of the finds by a museum is to be welcomed and their meticulous publication is assured.
  After considering the possibility that the hoards may be votive deposits Stead concluded, not without reservations, that the hoards represent a treasury (1991: 463) In reaching this conclusion Stead raised a number of issues which deserve further examination; structured deposition in the Iron Age, the value of literary

 Wessex Archaeology, Portway House, South Portway Estate, Old Sarum, Salisbury, Wiltshire.sp4 6EB, UK.
ANTIQUITY 66 (1992): 395—8
NOTES

NOTES

NOTES

