ANTIQUITY, XLVI, 1972
Megalithic lunar observatories: an astronomer's view
D. C. HEGGIE
Professor Alexander Thom's book 'Megalithic lunar observatories' (Oxford, 1971) was reviewed in this journal by David Kendall, Professor of Statistics in the University of Cambridge (1971, 310—13), who described it as 'a remarkable book by a remarkable man', and 'compulsory reading for archaeologists'. In discussion with the Editor, Professor Kendall suggested that the book should also be appraised by an astronomer, and we are delighted that Mr Douglas Heggie of the Institute of Theoretical Astronomy in the University of Cambridge was able to do thisfor us. He says of this most interesting article that it 'describes one astronomer 's view of just how much Professor Thom has established concerning astronomy in megalithic times'. With the verdicts of Kendall and Heggie before them, no reasonable archaeologist can do other than give Thom's work the most serious consideration.
  
Although several studies along broadly similar lines have been attempted by other authors in the past, it will benefit any archaeologist approaching the work of Professor A. Thom for the first time to do so with a fresh mind. What is new about Thom's approach to this subject, which many astronomers find equally absorbing, is the care that has evidently been bestowed in the measurement of the sites themselves, the attention to detail that characterizes the reduction of this data, and finally the great volume of source material which, in his books and other writings, he has put at the disposal of others. Previous work seems by comparison to have been of lower accuracy and restricted to at most a few sites, of which Stonehenge figures most frequently.
  Professor Thom's first book on this subject dealt with some 150 British megalithic sites from several points of view, and in his latest work (1971), recently reviewed in this journal by Professor Kendall, he selected about 50 of these, with a few others, for the purpose of discovering how much the constructors of these fascinating monuments may have known about the motion of the moon. It is to a discussion
• Megalithic sites in Britain.
mainly of the astronomical content of this book that the following remarks will be devoted.
ESSENTIAL ASTRONOMY
Thom's own account of the gross features of the motion of the sun and moon, which are central to the understanding of his thesis, can hardly be bettered for succinctness. An astronomer generally measures the position of any object in the sky by two angles, one of which may be what is called 'declination'. Its importance here lies in the fact that the declination of a star or planet determines the points on the horizon at which it rises and sets: the greater the declination the further to the north both points are. In summer, we are all aware, the sun rises and sets quite far to the north, and far to the south in winter. Throughout the year, likewise, the declination of the sun moves through a complete cycle, being high in summer and low in winter. It is one task of astronomers to measure its declination at midsummer (which Thom calls e), although they do not adopt direct methods.
  What is less well known is that the moon regularly completes a similar cycle, but takes only a month to do so. If the point at which it rises on the horizon is quite far north, then a fortnight later it will rise at a point equally far south. What have astronomers to say on its maximum declination for the month? Crude observation would show that this value, the monthly maximum declination, or MMD for short, is not much different from €. It varies slowly from month to month with a period of nearly 19 years, over a range that can be described by introducing a new angle, which Thorn calis i and astronomers have evaluated accurately. If for some months the MMD is chi, then a little over 9 years later it will be about e—i, and after a similar period it will approach the number e-fi again. Actually the motion of the moon is much more complicated, but only one more feature need concern us: the MMD in addition varies cyclically by a small amount, called by Thom A, over a period of about six months. In principal all these changes in the declination of the moon can easily be detected by painstakingly studying the positions on the horizon at which it rises and sets.
ASTRONOMICAL SIGNIFICANCE OF
MEGALITHIC SITES
So much for the astronomical background. We next come to the central question: how much of this was known to the people who constructed megalithic monuments? Let us suppose that it was indeed the rising and setting positions of astronomical objects that they attempted to record. For stars there was no problem: the declination of a star changes so slowly that the point at which it rises hardly moves for many years, and it would have been worth while marking it permanently. The point at which the sun rises changes from day to day, but the rising position at, for example, midsummer changes so slowly that many years would elam,e before its motion could be detected. As for the moon, its MMD changes noticeably from month to month, as already explained, mainly over a period of about 19 years. The limits of this variation are, to a certain accuracy, almost the same for some centuries, so that it would be worth recording the corresponding positions on the horizon. Is there any indication that records of some of these points still exist in the megalithic sites ?
  This was one question which Thom answered, to my mind conclusively, in his Megalithic sites in Britain. He there remarked (p. 94) that the appropriate points on the horizon could be indicated by a long alignment of stones, perhaps numbering as few as two, or perhaps by a circle and a single menhir. In any case one stands at one end of the alignment—the backsight—and looks beyond the other—the foresight. In this way a location on the horizon is indicated, and it remains to find the declination of an object which rises or sets there.
  The point on the horizon need be distinguished in no other way, but at some sites the alignment of a single flat menhir indicates a feature on the horizon which is somehow distinctive: it may be a valley, the top of a hill, or the apparent coast of a distant island, and so on. The advantage of such a site (the point on the horizon here being termed by Thom an 'indicated foresight') is that the rising position towards which the constructor of the site intended us to look is generally much more accurately defined than in the cases where an alignment alone was constructed. From the point of view of the student attempting to interpret them the drawback is that it may not be precisely clear which of several points on the horizon was intended, or even exactly where we ought to stand to use the foresight, if we can identify it uniquely. Such sites should therefore be set aside until it has been established that alignments in general have astronomical significance.
  Although Thom did not omit them in his first analysis, his result is almost unchanged if we do so, since most of the sites he considered then were alignments: in other words both foresight and backsight were artificial structures. It was clearly demonstrated that very many of the alignments could be accommodated by the hypothesis that they were erected to indicate points on the horizon at which very bright stars rose or set, or those at which the moon or sun rose or set at one or other position of permanent interest, as described above.
MEGALITHIC LUNAR OBSERVATORIES  If in this way we select those alignments that seem to have been constructed for the purpose of studying the motion of the moon, a detailed study of these alone (Thom, 1967, fig. 10.1) establishes in a definite way that they were set up to indicate not its centre, but either the upper or lower edge. The fact that the alignments fall into two such clear groups in approximately the way that would be expected if either edge were observed, is further strong evidence that one function of some of these sites was the study of the motion of the moon. This conclusion is little affected by the exclusion of sites with indicated natural features on the horizon as foresights.
INDICATED FORESIGHTS
As Thom remarked on p. 121 of his 1967 book it is not possible to establish from alignments alone that their erectors knew anything about the motion of the moon other than the large 19-year oscillation of the MMD, for they are not suffciently accurate to show whether or not the six-month variation had been detected. Only the sites with indicated foresights are capable of the required precision, and their interpretation is subject to the diffculty of ambiguity already alluded to.
  Although some remarks are directed towards this subject in Megalithic sites in Britain, it forms the major part of the material in Professor Thom's new book. With a suitable indicated foresight it is, in principle, possible to observe the six-month oscillation of the MMD and so in a study of these sites an attempt must be made to decide whether or not indications exist of the position in which the moon rose or set when its declination took one of the twelve values and
  Thom's answer to this question is a clear 'yes', but his evidence is explicitly signposted in only one or two places. It is clear, however, from these few remarks (1967, 125 ; 1971, 47 ; etc.) that the author intends our confidence in the truth of his assertion to follow directly from the frequency of sites in which one or more of the interesting declinations are quite accurately shown. It is important that the reader of this book now decides whether or not this is correct, for, if it is, we can proceed to examine the sites with more ambiguous foresights or backsights, and can confidently select only those combinations of foresight and backsight which most closely indicate rising and setting positions when the declination of the moon took one of the interesting values. This is Professor Thom's approach, although presented rather implicitly in his book.
  In arriving at a decision, the reader should be guided by considerations of the following kind. The indicator stone or alignment generally indicates unequivocally whether the intended declination is close to e-bi, €—i, —e+i or —e—i (although in the case of Carrach an Tarbert the stone cannot point to both suggested foresights), but around these values there are six interesting declinations, if we exclude the centre of the moon and assume that only one or other edge was observed. These lie in a range of declination of only 49 minutes of arc, which corresponds to some small section of the horizon where there may be a number, say N, of usable foresights. Even if these are just randomly placed on this part of the horizon, the number that may be expected to indicate one of the interesting declinations to within an accuracy of x minutes of arc is about Looking at
Thom's list of reliable indicated foresights on p. 76 (1971), it is seen that some of the indicated declinations agree with each other to no better than 7 minutes, although this is exceptional, so that the reader may feel at liberty to take x to be about 2. He may then study the various illustrations of the relevant section of horizon given for most sites, determine N, and decide whether the number of indications is indeed impressive. If there are several possible backsights, this should be taken into account as well.
  The reader must not be tempted to accept figure 7.1 as proof of Thom's assertion, for it is constructed from just those combinations of backsight and foresight that were selected because they indicate declinations close to the interesting values. It does suggest, however, the manner in which the evidence could have been presented. To establish conclusively that megalithic man did observe the interesting declinations, a calculation should be carried out of the declination corresponding to every sightline within, say, the 49-minute range already mentioned. If the interesting declinations showed up in these calculations significantly more often than others, then we should have little hesitation in accepting this part of Thom's thesis.
  The same diffculties hinder any study of indicated foresights at solar sites, but if they be ignored for the moment, it is possible from these monuments to arrive at a value for €. This varies slowly with time, according to a formula, versions of which have been published by various authors including de Sitter, the source used by Thom. Actually these formulae are intended for use only at times within, at most, a few hundred years of the present. However, a more accurate computation reveals that the error in estimating ages by de Sitter's formula amounts to no more than about fifteen years at the epoch of interest.
  In the same way Thom analyses the declinations indicated by his selected sightlines at the lunar observatories, and arrives at a value of € closely agreeing with that just obtained at the solar sites, and values for i, A and the mean apparent size of the moon in good agreement with the values observed today. Astronomical theory predicts that these quantities do not change significantly over 4,000 years, but again the agreement is not evidence that the sites were designed to show the interesting declinations, for reasons already given.
EXTRAPOLATION
Thom does not deny that the establishment of accurate sightlines is fraught with considerable diffculties, but his discussion of how these could be overcome invites some comment. The most serious diffculty, in the sense that it is the one whose neglect would introduce the largest errors, stems from the fact that the moon rises and sets roughly only once each day. If the moon reaches its MMD between two successive risings, then when it does rise its declination will be different from the maximum value for that month. A sightline established at either moonrise would generally be in serious error, and its accurate erection depends on the knowledge by its constructors of some method of correcting for this effect, i.e. a method of 'extrapolation'.
  As Professor Thom remarks, this could be accomplished by measuring out lengths on the ground related to a fundamental length, called G, which depends on the site. Since this quantity would be used repeatedly, there seems a high likelihood that, at least in some sites, i: would be permanently laid out on the ground. Evidence for this is given in part of figure 9.14, which shows that the overall size of certain sites is comparable to the theoretically ideal value of G. This evidence, though weak by itself, finds support in Professor Thom's analysis of a type of monument which has not so far been mentioned.
  Extrapolation requires, as well as G, another quantity that can be obtained from it by any one of several geometrical methods. Thom's ingenious suggestion is that the stone fans of Caithness may have served this purpose, a hypothesis that can be checked in the following manner. From the dimensions of the fan one can estimate the value of G for which it is appropriate, and the horizon is studied for possible foresights in the usual way. The value of G for a foresight, if one is found, may then be compared with that used in the construction of the fan. The agreement (figure 9.14 again) is good. It must be remarked that, in one case at least (Dirlot), the remains of the fan are vestigial, rendering G uncertain, while in this and in others, the indications of the foresights are rather weak. However, because conspicuous indicators were erected in other parts of the country does not imply that the men in Caithness need have done so. After all, this method of extrapolation seems to be peculiar to Caithness, at least in Britain. More recently Thom and his colleagues have obtained quite similar results for two fans in north-west France (Chronicle, BBC2, 21 August 1971). *
THE EFFECT OF THE DISTANCE OF THE
MOON
Before continuing this discussion of extrapola-
  * A. Thom and A. S. Thom. The astronomical significance of the large Carnac menhirs, 3. Hist. Astr., 11, 1971, 147—60.
MEGALITHIC LUNAR OBSERVATORIEStion it is appropriate to make mention of the other serious diffculty that might have hindered attempts to erect accurate sightlines. Because the moon is, relatively speaking, a nearby object, the point on the horizon at which it rises depends not just on its declination but on its distance as well, which varies over a period of about one month. As Thom shows, however, its distance, on that day of the month when the moon reaches its MMD and during the few months when this is close to an interesting value, varies with a period of about 180 years.* Since some of the sites show the rising and setting positions corresponding to the average distance or, more precisely, the average of the reciprocal of the distance, their erection must have taken not less than about 90 years. All the sites in fact show on average the positions corresponding to the average inverse distance, and it is again possible that this is almost entirely due to the selection of sightlines close to these positions.
  Thom's theoretical derivation of G can be substantially improved. First, the value of the quantity k used in equation (2.2) is more correctly
2772
	k	— tan g,
as is shown in an appendix. This implies that values of G should be increased by about 9 per cent when the declination is approximately, and by about 4 per cent when it is about This correction reduces the agreement between the ideal values and those measured from the stone fans, but only in the case of Mid Clyth would it lead to errors of as much as a minute of arc.
  The values of k and G depend with surprising sensitivity on the distance of the moon, a point that appears not to be discussed in Thom's book. As is shown in an appendix, k and G vary on this account by over 20 per cent on either side of their mean values. If the workers at these sites had used one value always, errors of
  * Thom's discussion of this period is slightly incorrect, for the average time between successive declination maxima is not the draconic month (p. 80) but the tropical month. This does not affect the value of the period, however, since 250 draconic months almost exactly equals 249 tropical months.
at least 2 minutes of arc would have occurred frequently. They might have determined G afresh on each occasion it was required, but the method by which, Thom suggests, this could be done (p. 101) demands observations on three consecutive nights.
FEASIBILITY
Such considerations suggest a study of the visibility of rising and setting phenomena, a point that is scarcely considered by Thom. Even when most of the sky is free from cloud, by a simple effect of perspective it is at the horizon that the cloud appears to be thickest. Even when the sky is completely unobscured by cloud, there is often suffcient haze near the horizon that daylight moonrise is diffcult to observe. (Thom's diagrams of the horizon are presented according to conditions prevailing at night.) If we suppose that the probability that two particular successive moonrises take place over a suffciently clear horizon is one half— and today it would be substantially less than thist—and take account of the fact that about half occur in daylight, we see that at most in only one month out of four would it be possible to observe both moonrises on either side of the time when the moon reached its MMD. Since erection of a sightline corresponding to, say, the declination €+i+A requires this to be done for two consecutive months, of the periods when the MMD is near this value, only at about one in eight will it be possible to set up a sightline. Since there are at most two such periods every 18 years, a new sightline can be erected only once every 70 years on average. If G is to be evaluated every so often, so that observations on three consecutive days are required, the position is still more diffcult, and in any case several sightlines must be erected before it is possible to construct one corresponding to the mean distance of the moon. By the time suffcient observations had accumulated, the slow change of would have become suffcient to interfere seriously with this project. It is considerations
  t Data published by R. J. Livesey (1971. The distribution of cloud and its effect on observing, y. Brit. Astron. Assoc., LXXXI, 292—4), show that it does not exceed 1 in 10.
of this kind which might compel us to search for some alternative explanation of the apparent high accuracy of some of the sites.
CONCLUSION
To the reader who has successfully followed the previous paragraphs it will come as no surprise if the views there expressed are summarized as follows. Thom's evidence that megalithic man observed the moon is so strong that it may be accepted without hesitation. That he also used extrapolation in the interpretation of his observations seems to be indicated by the evidence of the stone fans of Caithness and elsewhere. The data on which Thom bases his assertion that the builders of the monuments established accurate sightlines for several interesting declinations, implying a knowledge of its motion that was not to be improved upon for over three thousand years, may have been interpreted incorrectly. This view is supported by a consideration of the feasibility of the project which, according to Thom, megalithic man successfully completed.
APPENDIX  Much interesting material for feeding research in this subject may be found in Professor Thom's writings. The fact that few others have repeated his work should be understood as a symptom, not of doubts as to its value, but of the enormous effort that must be expended if Thom's standards are to be maintained.
  
Let b be the declination of the moon at a short time, t, after it achieves its MMD, called g. Let {D be the angular velocity of the moon across the sky. Then, using the cosine formula of spherical trigonometry, sin b sin g cos zot, so that
	B g 	— % tan g. 02t2.	(1)
If r is the distance of the moon, a and e respectively the semi-major axis and eccentricity of its orbit around the earth, and P the value of the sidereal month, from celestial mechanics
	r2 —	(2)
edited by
F. R. HODSON
    Mathematics in DAVID KENDALL & P. TÄUTU the Archaeological
for the Royal Society and the Romanian Academy
and Historical and published by
Sciences the Edinburgh University Press
0.00Introducing Thom's quantity k, (1) and (2) imply that
              a 4 k 	tan g
r
Thom's expression for k corresponding to the monthly motion of the moon should be multiplied by
(1 —e2).
Putting for the moment r=a, we see that Thom's values of k and G should be increased approximately by 9 per cent when g e+i and by 4 per cent when g e—i. - varies about its mean
value by over 5 per cent, and so k and G may differ from their mean values by at least 20 per cent.
ANTIQUITY
  

  
43
  
43
  

  
43
  
