ANTIQUITY, XL, 1966
Moonshine on Stonehenge
by R. J. C. ATKINSON
Professor Gerald Hawkins, of the University of Boston, wrote two articles in Nature in 1963 and 1964 propounding a new astronomical interpretation of Stonehenge. His articles caused considerable discussion. He has now written a book boldly entitled Stonehenge Decoded (London: Souvenir Press, 1965. 202 pp., 23 pls., 15 figs. 30s.) which includes the two Nature articles as appendixes. The book is written in collaboration with John B. White, and has already aroused wide controversy. Here Professor Richard Atkinson sets out his views on the book, described on thejacket with the words: 'An astronomer examines one of the great puzzles of the ancient world.' This review article might be sub-titled 'An archaeologist examines that astronomer'.
  
    HE astronomical significance of Stonehenge has been the subject of intermittent debate and speculation ever since 1740, when Stukeley [1] first observed that the axis of the sarsen structure and of the Avenue pointed at least approximately to the sunrise at the summer solstice. Apart from Sir Norman Lockyer [2], however, few professional astronomers concerned themselves with this question, until the appearance in Nature of the two articles by Gerald S. Hawkins, Professor of Astronomy at Boston University, in 1963 and 1964 [3]. The first of these claimed the discovery of a number of additional alignments of astronomical significance, marked by pairs of stones and other features of the site; and the second suggested that the Aubrey Holes had been used as a neolithic 'computer' for the prediction of movements of the moon and of eclipses. Subsequently these theories received much wider publicity, in Britain as well as in the United States, through a CBS television programme, The Mystery of Stonehenge, which provided a superb example of partiality and tendentiousness in the presentation of an academic controversy.*
  Professor Hawkins has now elaborated his ideas in a book whose title, Stonehenge Decoded,
  * The producer, Mr Harry Morgan, was in no way to blame. His own approach was meticulously impartial.
leaves no doubt of his confidence in the rightness of his conclusions—a confidence explicity echoed in his text. 'There can be no doubt that Stonehenge was an observatory; the impartial mathematics of probability and the celestial sphere are on my side' (p. vii). 'I think I have demonstrated beyond reasonable doubt that the monument was deliberately, accurately, skilfully oriented to the sun and the moon' (pp. 146—7). 'I think I have put forward the best theory to account for the otherwise unexplained holes' (p. 147). 'I think there is little else in these areas that can be discovered at Stonehenge' (p. 147).
MOONSHINE ON STONEHENGE  Confidence of this order is a rare and precious possession, beyond the grasp of most scientists and scholars, who are all too often beset by inconvenient doubts about the reliability of their data or their methods, and about their own ability to achieve unequivocal solutions to their problems. If we are to share the author's confidence in his conclusions, and are to avoid, with him, any taint of arrogance, we must be satisfied (as he certainly is) that his data are reliable and that his arguments are logically and mathematically sound. We must remember, moreover, that the general reader (to whom his book is addressed) will accept uncritically both the data, the methods and the conclusions, partly because of the author's standing as an academic astronomer, and not least because he has used a computer. This, at any rate by nonscientists, is nowadays regarded as the secular equivalent of divine revelation. For all these reasons this book requires, even if it does not intrinsically deserve, a very close examination.
  The first five chapters (presumably the work chiefly of Mr White) are concerned with legends about Stonehenge, with the archaeology of the site and its builders, with possible methods of construction, and with neighbouring prehistoric monuments. All this has been compiled, uncritically and in places very carelessly, from published sources, by no means all of which have been acknowledged. The chapter on the neighbouring monuments, for example, leans very heavily, often to the point of close paraphrase, on the text of my Stonehenge and Avebury guide-book, published by H.M.S.O., from which Crown copyright illustrations have been reproduced without acknowledgement or authority. There is, however, no mention of this publication in the bibliography of Hawkins's book or, for that matter, of Piggott's West Kennet Long Barrow or even of Newall's offcial guide, Stonehenge.
  These introductory chapters are marred by a disregard for accuracy and by a taste for bizarre interpretation which characterize the book as a whole. We are told, for example, that Beaker graves contain swords and spears (p. 36); that Stonehenge I was orientated by its entrance towards the midsummer sunrise (p. 46); that the axis of Stonehenge Il points to the Heel Stone (p. 48); that stoneholes B and C may belong to Stonehenge I (p. 48) ; that the Avenue follows 'contours of altitude' (p. 50); that the Y and Z Holes 'seem to have been filled again soon after they were dug' (p. 57); that Stonehenge Illc was completed 'probably before 1600 B.C.' (pp. 58—9); and that 'there seems to be a strong probability' that some of the Stonehenge sarsens had previously been erected at Avebury. That neither Professor Hawkins nor his collaborator are archaeologists is clear enough ; but this is all the more reason for expecting them to have taken competent advice on these matters before publication, and for regretting that they have not.
The remainder of the book sets out to substantiate Hawkins's claim that in all three of its main periods of construction (two or more of which are frequently and quite unjustifiably conflated) Stonehenge formed an elaborate observatory. The argument falls into two parts, the first of which concerns alignments. The method adopted was to calculate from published plans, with the help of a computer, the directions of some 240 alignments between pairs of stones, stoneholes and post-holes. These were then compared with the directions, also calculated by a computer, of the risings and settings of the sun and moon at their maximum declinations and at the equinoxes, as they would have been seen from Stonehenge in 1500 B.C. Bright star positions were also tested, but were found not to be significant.
  The use of a computer for this purpose has, of course, no bearing on the validity or otherwise of the results obtained. What matters is the reliability of the data on which the computer operates; and here this is suspect, if only because of the unsuitability of the plans used as the basis for calculation. One of these is the plan given at the end of the 1956 edition of my Stonehenge, which was intended purely for illustration and is wholly inappropriate as a basis for accurate measurement. The other appears, from the scale quoted, to be a nowobsolete Ministry of Works plan from earlier editions of the offcial guide. Both are printed on paper which has a marked differential expansion with changes in humidity. Moreover, it should be understood that since many of the 'markers' involved in these alignments are either fallen stones or empty holes, the direction of the original alignments, if any, cannot novvr be recovered except within unacceptably wide limits of error.
ANTIQUITY  ()f the 240 sight-lines examined, Hawkins claims that for Stonehenge I (actually features of period I and Il are involved, as well as the Station Stones and the holes F, G and H, possibly of natural origin) there are 24 which correspond significantly to one or other of the 18 calculated directions for risings or settings of the sun and moon. He accepts arbitrarily as significant any sight-line which falls within +20 of the direction of one of these risings and settings. This limit of error is quite unrealistic, and is about 24 times larger than the errors actually obtained by experiment in sighting on a rising or setting with a pair of sticks. Translated into practical terms, it meanss for instance, that the Heel Stone could be moved 12 ft. to the north-east without affecting Hawkins's claim (itself unacceptable) that it marks the midsummer sunrise for an observer at the centre of the circle.
  Hawkins claims that his observations fit best the hypothesis that the builders of Stonehenge interpreted 'sunrise' as the point at which the full orb of the sun stood tangent to the horizon (and similarly for sunset, moonrise and moonset), and not the point of the first or last gleam of light. A statistical analysis of his (unpublished) table of vertical errors* fails to substantiate this claim. The figures fit either hypothesis indifferently. He also argues, incorrectly, that if the Heel Stone were straightened from its present leaning position, the rising sun at midsummer in the mid-2nd millennium B.C. would have stood exactly on its tip as seen from the centre of the circle. He ignores here the effect of 35 centuries of weathering of the chalk surface of Salisbury Plain, which has lowered the line of sight to the horizon by about 18 in. This is, within an inch or two, the amount by which the top of the Heel Stone would be raised, if it were upright. Accordingly then, as now, its tip would have coincided approximately with the horizon, and the risen sun would have cleared its tip by a distance equal to its own apparent diameter.
  Of the 24 alignments which Hawkins claims for 'Stonehenge I', only 23 actually fall within his own assigned limits of error, In either case these alignments involve 14 different points, between which he alleges that there are only 50 'reasonable' sight-lines (p. 136). He then appeals to 'the impartial mathematics of probability' to show, ostensibly, that the probability of getting
  * Kindly communicated to me by Mr C. A. Newham. Hawkins explains this on p. 111.
  ** The correct probability, calculated with pencil and paper instead of a computer, is o•000006. The arithmetic is not as 'horrible' as Hawkins suggests (p. 136). It takes about three minutes.
24 'significant' alignments by chance out of a total of 50 is o•00006—that is, that there is 'less than one chance in ten thousand that the stones had been so aligned by accident'.
  This is the crucial point for the whole of his alignment theory ; for in any investigation of this kind it is essential to test whether the results differ significantly from what could be expected if chance factors alone were operating. His result here is wrong all through. The probability quoted is wrong;** the method of testing the hypothesis is wrong;t and the restriction of the possible sight-lines to 50 is wholly inadmissible.tt If the correct tests of significance are applied impartially, they show that it is not possible to assert that the results claimed are due to anything but chance. This is hardly surprising, in view of the very wide limits of 'significance' which Hawkins has chosen, arbitrarily, to adopt.
  The eight alignments claimed for Stonehenge Ill are equally inadmissible. Four of them fall outside Hawkins's own arbitrary limits of error; two more involve fallen stones; and one (from the mid-point of the gap between stones 30 to 1 and the Heel Stone) would almost certainly have been blocked by the Slaughter Stone when upright. In discussing the reasons why his results here are so unconvincing, he
  t What Hawkins has calculated (incorrectly) is the probability of getting exactly 24 significant alignments by chance out of a total of 50, where the probability of a random alignment being significant is 0'2. The appropriate statistical test, however, requires the calculation of the probability of getting by chance at least the observed number—that is, the observed number or more.
  t t Between the 14 points involved there are 182 possible sight-lines ; but is it legitimate to include only one of the four post-holes near the Heel Stone (A) and exclude the other three? With all four included, there are 272 possible sight-lines. These totals may be reduced by eliminating all lines shorter than the shortest which Hawkins accepts, and those unlikely to have been used in one direction (e.g. from the Heel Stone and to the (unmarked) centre of the circle). They cannot, however, be reduced below 1 and 159 respectively. Under the conditions stated, the probabilities of getting by chance at least 23 significant alignments from these totals are 046 and o•97. Both are wholly consistent with the hypothesis that the alignments claimed are accidental.
MOONSHINE ON STONEHENGEsuggests, gratuitously, that it may be because of faulty restoration of the fallen stones in 1958 and 1964. Having played some part in those operations, I can state unequivocally that the shapes of the bases of the stones, and of the accurate moulds of themselves which they had left in the soft chalk, made it impossible for any errors of positioning to have occurred of the magnitude which Hawkins suggests. That he is here merely clutching at straws is suggested by his statement (p. 113) that 'Stone 23 fell, was lifted, fell again and was finally set in cement in 1964'. This is pure imagination; stone 23 has fallen once only, in March 1963.
  The author's second principal contention is that the 56 Aubrey Holes served as a 'computer (that is, as tally-marks) for predicting the movements of significant moonrises along the horizon, and of eclipses of the moon and sun. For these astronomical events Hawkins claims to have discovered a 56-year cycle not previously recognized by astronomers ; and he suggests that the Aubrey Holes are of that number because they were used to count the years of this cycle.
  That they could have been used in this way is not in doubt, provided that Hawkins's 56-year cycle is acceptable to other astronomers. Whether they actually were so used is another matter. The most obvious and most practical objection arises from the nature of the Aubrey Holes themselves. If you want to establish a set of permanent tally-marks, which will be usable over a number of cycles of 56 years each, to dig a ring of 56 pits and then immediately to fill them up is perhaps a rather curious way of going about it. Excavation leaves no doubt that the Aubrey Holes were filled up very soon after they were dug.
  Certain aspects of this part of the book show the same light-hearted disregard for accuracy that is detectable elsewhere. We are told, for instance, that the alignments from the centre of the circle to holes D and F respectively mark the directions of the maximum and minimum northerly risings of the full moon at mid-winter (p. 139). Yet if we consult the relevant diagram (p. 175), we see that the first of these phenomena took place up to more than 20 north of hole D, and that the second never reached as far east as hole F at all. Does Hawkins wish us to believe that errors of this order make no difference to his argument, in spite of the fact that 20 is equivalent to about four diameters of the sun or moon, and that the direction of a rising or setting can be fixed, with a pair of sticks, within repeatable limits of 5 minutes of arc?
  Are we to believe, moreover, that holes F, G and H [4], regarded by their excavators as natural phenomena resulting from the growth of trees or bushes, must none the less be artificial stoneholes because they are involved in alleged alignments? Admittedly the status of these holes is uncertain; but it is perhaps unwise to doubt their natural origin, as Hawkins does (p. 156), on the somewhat curious ground that 'there is no record of trees having grown there'. One wonders indeed what kind of record he would expect to have from prehistory, other than the holes themselves.
  This trivial example of invalid reasoning illustrates not unfairly Professor Hawkins's view of the nature of historical interpretation, as applied to non-literate evidence. As he says in his Preface: 'If I can see any alignment, general relationship or use for the various parts of Stonehenge then these facts were also known to the builders. Such a hypothesis has carried me along over many incredible steps.' The epithet 'incredible' is a most happy choice.
  Whatever the major shortcomings of this book, however, it must in justice be made clear that it does contain some suggestions of positive value. The first of these is that whenever an observer at the centre of the circle sees the full moon nearest the winter solstice rise over* the Heel Stone, an eclipse of the sun or moon follows (only half of these would be visible from Stonehenge). If it is substantiated, this will be the best explanation for the Heel Stone so far put forward. The second is that the latitude of Stonehenge was deliberately chosen so that the extreme northerly and southerly risings and settings of the sun and moon, at the solstices, were approximately at right-angles one to another. This would account for the nearly rectangular layout of the four Station Stones, the
  * 'over the Heel Stone' evidently means within of its apex.
ANTIQUITYshape of the rectangle being determined by its diagonal 91—93, which also points to extreme positions of the rising and setting moon [5]. This suggestion has all the more cogency in that it has been made quite independently, and at an earlier date, by Mr C. A. Newham [6]. If it is accepted, then at least the positions of the four Station Stones must have been established in period Il; though it is still possible that the stones themselves were not erected, as permanent markers, until the building of the rest of the sarsen structure in period Illa. This is a problem for the excavators of the future.
NOTES  It is a great pity that Professor Hawkins has allowed his undoubted enthusiasm for his subject to lead him beyond the bounds of logic and accuracy, imposed alike by the obligations of scholarship and by the parameters of the problem he has tried to solve. We must be grateful to him, none the less, for quickening the interest of prehistorians in th.e early development of observational science and metrology. This, as the meticulous work of Professor Thom now demonstrates [7], is an aspect of prehistoric culture which we have too often undervalued.
  
  [1] W. Stukeley, Stonehenge (1740), 35.
  [2] N. Lockyer, Stonehenge . . Astronomically Considered (1906).
  [3] Nature, 200, 1963, 306; 202, 1964, 1258; both reproduced as appendixes to Hawkins's book.
  [4] Atkinson, Stonehenge (Pelican, 1960), 79.
  [5] Only one of the Station Stones (93) is still upright; 91 has fallen, and 92 and 94 are missing. The precise shape of the original figure, and the precise directions of sight-lines between pairs of these stones, can thus no longer be determined.
  [6] Yorkshire Post, 16.3.1963 ; The Enigma of Stonehenge (privately printed, 5 Sedge Rise, Tadcaster, Yorks., 1964).
Book Chronicle
 We include here books which have been received for review, or books of importance not received for review, of which we have recently been informed. We welcome information about books, particularly in languages other than English and American, of interest to readers of ANTIQUITY. The listing of a book in this chronicle does not preclude its review in ANTIQUITY.  [7] ANTIQUITY, 1966, 121—8, with additional references.
  
The Greeks in India by George Woodcock, London: Faber and Faber, 1966. 199 pp., 36 pls. 42s.
The Buried Past : A Survey of Great Archaeological Discoveries by Henri-Paul Eydoux. London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1966. 192 pp., 16 pls., 11 unnumbered maps and diagrams. A translation, and often a poor one, of the author's L'histoire arrachée å la terre, published by Arthéme Fayard in 1962 with three times as many diagrams for 13 francs. 36s. How extraordinary to suppress the plan of Barnenez, to translate dolmens å couloir as 'corridor dolmens' and to keep on referring to 'campaniforme pottery' instead of beakers.
The Mycenaeans in History by Alan E.
Samuel. Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey : Prentice-Hali, 1966. 158 pp., 48 ms., 5 maps. $2.45.
The Discovery of Time by Stephen Toulmin and June Goodfield. London : Hutchinson, 1965. 281 pp., 8 pls. 35s•
Islamic Art and Architecture by Ernst
Kühnel. London: Bell, 1966. 200 pp., 80 pls., 21 figs., 2 maps. A translation by Katherine Watson of Die Kunst des Islam (Stuttgart, 1962).	
Roman and Early Byzantine Portrait Sculpture in Asia Minor by Jale Inan and Elisabeth Rosenbaum. Published for the British Academy by the Oxford University Press, London, 1966. 244 pp., 187 pls., 1 map. {7 7s.
Republican Rome by A. H. McDonald.
London: Thames and Hudson. 1966. (Volume 50, Ancient Peoples and Places.) 195 pp., 48 pls., 22 figs., maps and tables. 35s.
continued on p. 232
212
  
212
  
212
  
