ANTIQUITY, 1.111, 1979
Moving the stones to Stonehenge
J. E. GARFITT
Mr Garfitt is a Consultant Forester. He has been forestry adviser to large landed estates all over England and Walesfrom 1946 when he left the Royal Indian Navy. Before that he followed a degree in Forestry at Oxford by six years in the Colonial Forest Service (Malaya). Mr Garfitt says that his work involves intensive inspection ofzooodland andprovides opportunitiesfor the discovery ofearthworks and artifacts. He is interested primarily in the prehistoric periods because of the opportunities they provide for imaginative reconstruction, as those who read on will discover. Mr Garfitt lives at The
Swedish House, Spring Hill, Nailszoorth, Stroud, Glos. GL6 OLX.

It appears to be widely accepted that the sarsen stones at Stonehenge were transported from their original sites by means of rollers; and that the same method was used in moving the Preseli bluestones on the overland sections of their journey. It will be instructive to consider this method and its implications in some detail.
  Before the actual movement of the stones begins it is necessary to decide upon the best route to be followed from start to finish. The engineer cannot afford to take an easy route for the first few miles, only to find that impossible gradients or surfaces prevent the enterprise being carried to a successful conclusion. This may involve considerable detours from the most direct route. Some earth-cutting will be necessary in places to ensure that the stone is moving on reasonably level surfaces where it will not slide sideways off the rollers. In addition the surface in detail must be cleared of all obstructions that would prevent the rollers performing their function; and it must be hard enough to allow the rollers to roll and not to sink into the ground under the great weight of the stone.
  After the actual line to be followed has been decided upon and the surface suitably prepared, the next step is the construction of a suitable sledge so that the surface bearing upon the rollers will be smooth and regular. Considerable skill in carpentry will be required to achieve the necessary rigidity of a sledge needed to carry an irregularly-shaped heavy weight. Despite the ameliorating effect of the rollers, the natural irregularities of the ground are certain to impose great strains on the fabric of the sledge. Since binding of members in contact with the rollers is ruled out, all joints will require to be some form of halving or mortice-and-tenon, secured with oak dowels.
MOVING THE STONES To STONEHENGE  After the considerable and delicate task of mounting the stone on the sledge, by means of levers probably aided by partial cutting away of the earth below, the next problem to be faced is that of providing rollers. Some high land will have to be crossed between the original site of the stone and its destination, and the alignment chosen will cross this higher ground at its lowest point. It is probable, however, that it will, where possible, follow the natural contours along the side of a stream. It is in such places that alder trees will have been present in considerable quantity. Older trees of alder are neither round nor straight but if they have been coppiced they will provide an abundance of long straight poles eminently suitable for rollers. But, since alder timber is light in weight when dry and is not a hard dense wood, the rollers would be very much subject to crushing and would probably require constant replacement. Atkinson has suggested that oak would be used for rollers but this is, on the face of it, unlikely. The quantity of available oak of the size and shape required could be expected to be extremely small in any one area; and furthermore the sapwood of oak is not durable and is lacking in hardness. It would not, therefore, provide any qualities not already available in the much more plentiful alder.
  On each occasion that a stone is brought along this route it will be necessary to go through the same tedious procedure, the conditions becoming worse each time owing to puddling of the ground. Even if haulage is confined to dry periods, the surface will inevitably deteriorate with the passage of rollers under the very heavy weights. In wet weather the operation would probably become impossible. Given the best of conditions the emciency of this method—in terms of what one man can move—is low.
  The ingenuity of the megalith builders in raising the stones and particularly in preparing and placing in position the lintels of the trilithons is generally accepted. It is diffcult to believe that they did not take an obvious step in improving their transport system.
  By laying two or more poles lengthwise along the prepared track and setting crosspieces into notches cut into them at suitable intervals, the engineers would have a permanent track. A sledge, constructed with the greatest regard for strength from oak heartwood, would be necessary. A temporary branch of the track would be run up to the selected stone which would be manoeuvred by levers onto the sledge lying on the track. The stone would be firmly attached to the sledge by wedges and by windlassing with cordage and straps. The harness for hauling would be attached to various points along each side of the sledge and a pole would be fitted in such a way as to protrude from the back, allowing ample leverage for the steersmen.
  The poles forming the long members of the track would not require to be either round or particularly straight, provided that they would lie flat. Some light earth-cutting or cribwork would be necessary to ensure this on sloping surfaces. The cross-members would require to be straighter but not up to the specification of rollers. They would not rotate; the sledge would ride over them
  The advantages of this system are obvious; the sledge can be used for a number of stones; the trackway, with minimum replacement of crossmembers, can be used perhaps for all the stones from one 'donor' site; and haulage will be easier, simpler, and quicker. In addition the trackway can be constructed in advance of the actual movement of the stones, even in poor weather conditions, the work being allocated by sections to the inhabitants of the region through which it passes. This dispenses with the need for provisioning large mobile gangs. Indeed, not only could the construction of the track be done by local labour; it is very probable that the inhabitants of the region would also be called upon to haul the stone through their own area, only a small group of expert foremen actually accompanying the stone for the whole of its journey. This would impose no intolerable strain on the local economy, each stone requiring a comparatively brief period of labour by the local population—who would, of course, be based on their own homes. The logistics would thus present no diffculties.
  The track once laid can be used even when the ground is wet. And a fundamental advantage is that a superior line can be followed, since small depressions, narrow valleys, or swamps can be crossed on a crib-work base, thus reducing the distance to be traversed.
  This method, known as panglong, was in regular use in parts of South-east Asia, up to the last war, for the transport of large and heavy butts of tropical trees, up to 70 ft (c. 21 m) in length and weighing many tons (Arnott, 1929 ; Oliphant, 1937 ; Smythies, 1952 ; Brunig, 1965).
  It will be obvious that with this improved method of transport there would be a great reduction in the manpower required to transport the stones and this would have an important bearing on the time-scale involved in the construction of the monument at each stage. The method also lends itself to the more effcient use of the available manpower.
  Figures derived from actual experience in Malaysia indicate that, employing the Panglong system, the manpower required to move one ton for five miles (8 km) in one day probably lies between (Brunig, 1965) and 5-1 men (Arnot, 1929). If the mean is taken to be 3, it would require 90 men to move one 30-ton sarsen for 5 miles in 1 day; and the same number of men would in 5 days move the stone 25 miles (40 km), which is the approximate distance from Stonehenge of the stones' original sites. Thus the 80 sarsens could be transported by a team of 90 men in 400 days; or more probably by 360 men in 100 days, or say four months. The total labour needed would be 36,000 man-days.
ANTIQUITY  If it is assumed that the 18-mile (29 km) section of their route from the Preseli mountains to the sea was traversed in the same manner and at the same rate, each bluestone would require a team of 12 men for 4 days. The 80 bluestones would thus require the labour of 960 men for 4 days, or say 8 teams for 40 days. The total manpower requirement for this stage of the journey would be 3,840 man days.
  If these totals are added together it will be seen that the manpower necessary to move all the stones from their original sites to Stonehenge amounts to 41,760 man days. This does not, of course, include the preparation of the tracks. If we treble our total in order to make ample provision for this, the figure arrived at is 125,280 man days, or say 200 men working perhaps from April to October for three years. This represents a very considerable reduction from time-scales based on systems using rollers. The figures quoted by Hawkins allow 1,312,000 man days for the overland transport of the stones, a difference of 1,186,720 man days. If this reduction is applied to his time-scale for the construction of the whole monument, it would appear that Stonehenge could have been built from start to finish in 310,960 man days, or say 400 men working for seven months a year for four years.
  However, if as has been suggested above, the construction of the trackway was in fact the work of the inhabitants of the region through which the stones passed, the labour required actually on the site of Stonehenge is reduced proportionately. The number of man days allowed in these calculations for the construction of the trackway is 82,520. If this is subtracted from the total of 310,960 above, 220,440 man days are left for work at Stonehenge itself; which might well be resolved into 571 days work for 400 men, who might therefore have been fully employed from the first of April to the middle of October for three years.
  In social terms, the constant passage of men across a wide area of country implies peaceful conditions. Manual handling of large stones under threat of armed attack is unthinkable and in the highest degree improbable. Peaceful conditions that would permit the transport of these stones over considerable distances over an appreciable period of time could only exist in a totally unwarlike population, or in one in which there was either strong central government or complete unanimity in the importance of the project in hand. The latter could result from a powerful hieratic influence. Any of these conditions would make it possible for the local population to be conscripted for the construction of that section of the route that passed through their immediate territory, as suggested above.
  Detailed consideration of the materials required suggest the following.
Timber tracks. The long members, or bearers, could be of any suitable reasonably straight timber lengths. Poles of alder, ash, oak, or rowan would serve this purpose. Their need to lie flat on the ground surface could be met by making hollows in the latter as necessary to accommodate small bends or irregularities. The minimum of preparation would be necessary since the function of the bearers is merely to carry the cross-members. Thus the removal of branches (of which young straight poles carry few of any size) and one cut at each end would be all that would be required; except, of course, for the notches at say one yard intervals in which the cross-members would lie. The notches do not require to be deeper than is necessary to hold the cross-members steady as the sledge passes over them. They do not have to rotate, and are more stable if they do not. These cross-members again can be of any suitable timber; but as they will be smaller in section (in order to be held in the notches) and will be taking a considerable strain when this is not transmitted in full to the bearers below, they will need to be more carefully selected.
MOVING THE STONES TO STONEHENGESledge. Since the stability and manoeuvrability of the stone, once loaded, depends on the sledge itself, this must be constructed to the highest practicable degree of rigidity. In order to run smoothly over the cross-members and to stand up to repeated use, the sledge will be constructed of oak heartwood, which is capable of taking a high polish. Timber of the required quality would be easily obtainable by felling some of the smaller dead oak trees of say 40 cm diameter that are normally found in an oak wood, suppressed and killed by their faster-growing neighbours. Such trees stand for many years, their sapwood decaying and leaving only the dark brown iron-hard heartwood. Oak splits easily with wedges and the fashioning of the sledge, although requiring skilful and sometimes laborious work, would certainly not be beyond the capacity of the men we are considering. Morticing, dove-tailing, and pegging would be used in the construction.
Cordage. It is unlikely that much, if any, cordage would be used where the harness was in contact with the sledge. It would be attached to the crossmembers of the sledge and probably to additional points along the long members where oak pins would act as cleats. The actual harness used by the haulage team would probably consist of ropes of twisted honeysuckle or wild clematis attached to the hide straps in such a way as to avoid breaking the fibres. Withies would almost certainly be used also, especially in the form of a more sophisticated breast-harness, comparable to the woven rattan used by the Malaysian gangs.
Lubrication would be provided by an old man or boy carrying a wooden bowl or leather bag containing mutton fat, lard, or tallow. This would be applied with a mop to the cross-members at the points where the sledge runners would be in contact, the applicator walking in front of the load.
Method of haulage. The hauliers would walk partly on the ends of the cross-members and partly on the ground at the side of the track, their harness lying at up to 15 0 from the line of advance. The foreman of the team would be the steersman at the rear of the load, applying his strength and weight through the long pole protruding from the sledge to which it would be firmly lashed. The great leverage obtained would allow him, with the help of directional hauling, to keep the sledge in the centre of the track and to negotiate curves.
Route used in transporting the sarsens. Consideration of the detail involved in hauling the stones on sledges over a prepared track points conclusively to a route with minimal gradients and with plentiful supplies of wood suitable for trackmaking. It is therefore improbable that the route over Salisbury Plain suggested by Atkinson would be used. Besides the obvious obstacle presented by the steep climb up the escarpment at Red Horn Hill (doubtfully possible even up the present road gradient, only produced by very extensive earthworks), the presence of adequate supplies of poles suitable for the trackway (or indeed for rollers) is very unlikely on the chalklands of the Plain. Engineers concerned for low gradients and supplies of suitable poles would almost certainly select an alignment following closely
the edge of a stream. In this case, after following Atkinson's route to Bishops Cannings, they would probably follow the course of the infant Avon by way of Horton, Beechingstoke, Wilsford, Charlton and Rushall to Upavon. Thereafter the Avon valley would be followed to the end of the Avenue; or possibly to the end of its undiscovered northern branch, perhaps near Durrington Walls. Although the river now hugs the steep bank at a number of points on its winding course, at that period the valley would be swampy and the stream divided into a number of constantlychanging channels. The frequent crossings of the stream's course would therefore present little obstacle to the trackway, since plentiful supplies of timber for any necessary crib-work would exist literally on the site.
  The prepared track up the Avenue into the centre of the monument would then be achieved without disturbing its banks or ditches or those of the Avenue itself since the track, raised slightly by crib-work, would pass over them. The problems of the steeper slopes up from the Avon would no doubt be surmounted with ease since this part of the journey would be of a ceremonial nature with consequent availability of much augmented manpower.
  It will be noted that the track described above follows a very gently falling gradient from the neighbourhood of Bishops Cannings right to the end of the Avenue, while the stretch from Avebury to the top of the descent down to Bishops Cannings is mainly level or with a slight rising gradient. These factors are vital when handling extremely heavy weights on a prepared track; a slight fall in gradient helps the hauling team but a steep down gradient is a dangerous embarrassment. Similarly a slight rising gradient can be tolerated for a short stretch while a steep rising gradient would be impossible to negotiate with safety, if at all.
Wider application of the Panglong system. It appears probable that a similar system was used for the transportation of large stones by the megalith builders in areas other than Britain. The principal requirements are a plentiful supply of easily handable timber and a terrain over which routes with low gradients can be found. In view of the more heavily forested state of the shores of the Mediterranean in early times, its application could have extended over a very wide area.
ANTIQUITY
BIBLIOGRAPHYARNOT, D. B. 1929. Timber extraction in Johore, Empire Forestry Journal, Vlll, 233—7.
ATKINSON, R. J. c. 1956. Stonehenge (London).
BRUNIG. E. F. 1965. Kuda-kuda verfahren der Stammholzwerbung in Sarawak, Forstarchiv, XXXVI, 162—4.
OLIPHANT, J. N. 1937. Development Of more intensive use Of mixed tropical forest, Empire Forestry Journal, XVI, 29—39•
HAWKINS, G. s. 1965. Stonehenge decoded (London).
We asked Professor R. y. C. Atkinson to comment. He writes :
Mr Garfitt's panglong solution to the problem of 	 timber (in the form of rollers) is far smaller, evenSMYTHIES, B, E. 1952. Extraction by kuda-kuda in Sarawak, Empire Forestry Review, 31—42.

transporting the sarsen stones is an interesting alternative, but one which could hardly reduce the total amount of labour required. His route down the Avon valley would need initially the clearance of many hundreds of acres of alder and willow thicket close to the river, even before the felling and cutting to length of some tens of miles run of timber to make the wooden trackway. For my own route across Salisbury Plain, which is several miles shorter, little clearance would be required, because by that time the area was probably open grassland, and any patches of thorn or juniper scrub could be avoided by slight detours.
For the Salisbury Plain route the requirement for
Book Chronicle continuedfromp. 189
Comparative photography. A century ofchange in Egypt and Israel. Introduction by Brian M. Fagan; photographs by Francis Frith & Jane Reese Williams. Carmel: The Friends of Photography Inc., 1979. 55 pp., 48 pls. $6.95. Inquiries should be addressed to The Friends of Photography, P.O. Box 239, Carmel, California 93921.
The Cambridge history of Africa edited by J. D.
Fage. Vol. 2 from c. 500 BC to AD 1050. Cambridge, London, New York, Melbourne : Cambridge University Press, 1978. 857 pp., 38 pls., 67 figs. {30.00.
Secuencia cultural de la prehistoria de Mallorca by Manuel Fernandez-Miranda. Biblioteca Praehistorica Hispana Vol. XV. Madrid : Martin Almagro, 1978. 378 pp., 48 pls., 78 figs. No price.
Siege warfare. The fortress in the early modern world 1494—1660 by Christopher Duffy. London  Henley: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1979. 301 pp., 82 illustrations, 20 maps. {9-95.
The mosaics of Roman North Africa. Studies in iconography and patronage by Katherine M. D. Dunbabin. Oxford Monographs on
Classical Archaeology. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1978. 323 pp., 218 pls. (2 in colour), 2 maps. {27-50.
if many sets of rollers were left at Stonehenge, where they could conveniently be re-used in the erection of the uprights and the raising of the lintels. Furthermore, even if only 20 grammes of grease were applied to each cross-member of the panglong each time a sledge passed (and this is about two-thirds of an ounce), the total requirement (of tallow, presumably) would be around 60 tonnes. All in all, it seems to me that Mr Garfitt's solution, though ingenious, is less probable than the use of rollers over a shorter route, even although the latter involves a steep haul up the northern escarpment of Salisbury Plain at Redhorn Hill.
Archaeological history of the Ancient Middle East by Jack Finegan. Boulder, Colorado : Westview Press; Folkestone : Dawson, 1979. 470 pp., 121 figs., 40 tables. {r 5.00.
The way of the Wilderness. A geographical study of the Wilderness itineraries in the Old Testament by G. I. Davies. Cambridge, London, New York, Melbourne : Cambridge University Press, 1979. 150 pp., 3 maps. & .95 hardcover.
Catalogo de Publicaciones de Temas Arquelogico. Vol. IX edited by D. José Muguel de Barandiaran. Vitoria (Alava) : Museo Provincial de Arquelogia, 1978. 336 pp., illustrated. No price.
Qatar archaeological report. Excavations 1973 edited by Beatrice de Cardi. Oxford: Oxford University Press for The Qatar National Museum, 1978. 226 pp., frontispiece in colour. 25 pls. (3 in colour), 65 figs. (2 pull-out). {20.00.
Daunia Vetus Terra, vita e mutamenti sulle coste del Tavolier by Catherine Delano Smith. Foggia : Biblioteca Provinciale di Foggia, 1975. 249 pp., 9 pls., 20 figs. Free of charge from Dr A. Celuzza, 11, Direttore Biblioteca Provinciale di Capilanta Viale Michelangelo, Foggia 7100, Apulia, Italy.
continued on p. 204
190

190

190

