NOTES AND NEWS
the interpretation which Professor Godwin himself has used for a soil from this region,l this may indicate a continuous pollen record back to a pre-forest phase of the Post-glacial.
  Had there been a long break before the forest humus (not peat) was laid down over the microliths, one would expect a sharp unconformity in the pollen spectra at the mineral soil junction, but Professor Godwin recognizes, as I do, the essential identity of the 'Above Flints' and 'Below Flints' spectra. The minor differences, possibly due to human influence, particularly interest me, but the whole comes within one pollen zone. Unfortunately, the forest phase in the mineral soil shows throughout a poor representation of elm (possibly, being a calcicole, it did not flourish on this soil), so that subdivision of Zone VIl cannot reliably be made. However, it is my experience that in the uplands of northern England Bronze Age humus layers show a much higher percentage of non-tree pollen, with heather figuring prominently, than in the White Gill humus. Even through a 5 in. thickness there was no progressive increase of heather, nor of the non-tree pollen fraction as a whole.
  Professor Godwin can see no reason why the charcoal should not postdate the microliths but anyone who has examined this site in its moorland context will be less ready to attribute the intimate juxtaposition of charcoal and flints at that place to mere coincidence. Only a proportion of the flints had been burnt, which is not easily explained by natural fires, while the species represented in the charcoal match up with the pollen not only of the overlying humus, but also of the underlying mineral soil.
  On the Pennines something approaching Professor Godwin's theory can apply, though even there the situation is not so simple as he suggests. But it was the obviously different nature of the White Gill site which caused me to put such weight upon it, while realizing that the lack of stratification precluded final proof of any theory. My conclusions about this site still impose the least strain upon the available facts; the evidence could not all be presented in a short article, but reference was given to where fuller details could be found.
G. W. DIMBLEBY
   1 H. Godwin, 'Pollen-analysis in Mineral Soil. An Interpretation of a Podzol Pollen-analysis by Dr G. W. Dimbleby', Flora, 146, 1958, 321.
NEOLITHIC ENGINEERING AND STONEHENGE
Mr Stephen Dewar writes this comment on Professor Atkinson's article entitled 'Neolithic Engineering' (ANTIQUITY, 1961, 29):
  As one who has been able to witness and observe with some care the erection of a megalith by Angami Nagas in the 1920s, may I be allowed to make a suggestion further to clarify Professor Atkinson's explanation of how a stone was raised upright in Neolithic times? He writes, 'At an inclination of about 70 degrees from the horizontal the levers would become ineffective: but from this position the stone could be pulled upright by hauling on ropes attached to the top'. This is precisely the method adopted by the Nagas of Assam. It should be added that at the same time much additional force is provided by thrust from the rear, which is applied by the use of many poles and bamboos of varying lengths. As the stone approaches the upright position, the shorter poles used by the men nearest the megalith become ineffective, and the longer ones in the hands of the rear ranks are brought into greater use. Helpers who have no room or no available pole, strain to get even a hand against the stone for the final push. There is, naturally enough, the psychological urge to have an individual hand in the game—or ceremony—even though the actual problem of engineering does not require it. 137
ANTIQUITY
  Professor Atkinson adds: Mr Dewar's suggestion is so eminently sensible and practical that it hardly requires comment. I would only add that it is particularly likely to have been used for the erection of those stones of the outer circle at Stonehenge which lie radially outside the uprights of the horseshoe trilithons. The latter must have been erected first and would consequently have obstructed the deployment of hauling-parties within the outer circle on the appropriate radial lines. There is some evidence, in the form of massive post-holes between the trilithons and the outer circle, for the use of sheerlegs which would allow the ropes to be carried over the top of the trilithon uprights, a device which I have already suggested tentatively (Stonehenge, Pelican Books, 1960, 133) following a suggestion made by the late E. H. Stone in 1924. In such a case additional help from a party pushing from the outside would obviously be welcome, though it would have needed very close control, because the haulers and pushers would have been out of sight of each other. l
   1 Mr. Dewar tells me that in the case of the Angami the haulers and pushers are not out of sight of each other, since the pullers are in two parties on the ropes, each party being well spread out to the rear, and what is required can be observed by the man in charge of the pushers. He adds, 'Trilithons, of course, present a different problem and there I claim no experience'—Ed.
A SOCKETED AXEHEAD OF IRON PLATE XX On 14 May, 1958, the writer of this note, together with Mrs Olwen Brogan and Mr C. M. Daniels, passed through (pronounced Shmekh), a scattered settlement at the confluence of several wadis and the great Wadi Sofeggin in Tripolitania. Between and Tininai, in the Wadi Tininai (a left-bank tributary of the Sofeggin), are the ruins of a number of ancient buildings of the fortified farm typel and near one of these is a group of Roman cisterns, the largest of which, like many others in the country, had a few years earlier been cleaned out and restored to use by the Department of Agriculture of the Tripolitanian provincial government. Some herdsmen were watering their flocks here at the time of our visit and had deposited a few items of personal property on the ground nearby. Amongst these was an axe with a wooden haft and a socketed head made of a piece of iron folded over to fit the haft, like a sleeve, the two edges meeting on the side in contact with the ground. The edges were not welded or riveted together and, apart from fitting tightly, the axehead was not secured to the haft in any way. The open end of the sleeve had been hammered flat to make a cutting edge which presumably had been sharpened with a whetstone. This is the only specimen of its kind that I have seen during extensive travels in North Africa. It was photographed (PLATE xx) by myself and, in colour, by Mr Dåniels.
  The shape of the axehead is more than vaguely reminiscent of the simplest forms of Bronze Age socketed axeheads, which must have been hafted in exactly the same way; and it has been suggested2 that the cast socketed axeheads and palstaves of the Bronze Age may have been developed from cutting tools made in the manner of this example. But a hammermade, socketed axehead of iron, in use in our own times in a country which has never known a Bronze Age (in the European sense), seems a curiosity worth recording.
D. J. SMITH
   1 Cf. R. G. Goodchild, The Limes Tripolitanus 11, your. Rom. Studies, XL, 1950, 34-37. Some of the remains in the area of are Islamic, others possibly Roman. 2 V. G. Childe, The Bronze Age, 1930, 67.
138
  ---------------

  ------------------------------------------------------------

---------------

------------------------------------------------------------

