New light on an ancient landscape:
lidar survey in the Stonehenge World Heritage Site
R.H. Bewley1, S.P. Crutchley2 & C.A. Shell3
Lidar(LightDetectionandRanging),whichhasrecentlycomeintouseforairborneenvironmental monitoring, is now beginning to find success in archaeological survey. Liaison between the Environment Agency and English Heritage has led to a lidar survey of the Stonehenge landscape, where new sites have been discovered, known ones extended and its potential as an important new tool for the management of archaeological landscapes is discussed for the first time. Lidar has the potential to radically transform our future understanding and management of the historic environment. The article by Devereux et al. (pages 648-660 of this volume) shows the technique applied to woodland.
Keywords: Stonehenge, landscape, lidar, aerial survey
Introduction
With the singular exception of Libby’s invention of radiocarbon dating, archaeology has always sought to take advantage of emerging technologies developed for other purposes. For nearly 100 years aeroplanes have provided archaeologists with stable platforms for aerial reconnaissance and photography, which has produced invaluable information (St Joseph 1966). Rapid advances in remote sensing have also had a significant impact on the way in which we observe the earth, not just from aircraft but also other airborne platforms, as well as satellites. Recent developments of airborne digital survey for environmental mapping are opening a new chapter in the discovery and recording of archaeological sites from the air using multispectral scanners and lidar (Holden et al. 2002). Aerial survey for archaeology, in the twentieth century, can be characterised as having been focused on data capture until, in the 1980s, archaeological aerial survey developed its interpretative and analytical skills, taking evidence from millions of aerial photographs (Wilson 2000). Air photo interpretations and syntheses have transformed our understanding of past human settlement and land use (Bewley 2001; RCHME 1984; Stoertz 1997), and have contributed directly to the development of archaeological investigation (Crutchley 2001; McOmish et al. 2002). The development of these interpretative skills means that new and powerful techniques can be more easily assessed and a measure of their significance can be made.
  Airborne lidar measures the height of the ground surface and other features in large areas of landscape with a resolution and accuracy hitherto unavailable, except through labourintensive field survey or photogrammetry. It provides, for the first time, highly detailed and accurate models of the land surface at metre and sub-metre resolution.
  The Stonehenge lidar survey had its origin in the requirement for English Heritage to develop new approaches for investigating the historic environment. This applies particularly in such projects as the ongoing development of a management plan for the World Heritage Site at Stonehenge. As well as contributing to the archaeological record itself, there was also a need to provide an archaeological context to the proposed improvements to the roads around Stonehenge, and to the design and decision on a location for a new visitor centre. These demands mean that all known investigative techniques were used in order to maximise our knowledge of this important landscape. A comprehensive landscape model, nevertheless, would also provide a major resource for future research, and for the presentation of the site to the public. The Stonehenge landscape is one of the most studied in Europe. If the new lidar technique proved useful here it is likely to have similar or greater impact for other historic landscapes (Batchelor 1997; RCHME 1979; Cleal et al. 1995; Crutchley 2002).
  Accordingly, English Heritage commissioned the Environment Agency to apply the new technique in the survey of the Stonehenge World Heritage Site, with the objective of testing the value of airborne lidar against the known information derived from conventional aerial survey (Crutchley 2002).
Methodology
Lidar survey is based on the principle, now familiar in terrestrial survey with a total station instrument, of measuring distance through the time taken for a pulse of light to reach the target and return. Airborne lidar does this with a pulsed laser beam which is scanned from side to side as the aircraft flies over the survey area, measuring between 20 and 100 thousand points per second to build an accurate, high resolution model of the ground and the features


Figure 1. Diagram of GPS frame of reference for calculating the position of the aircraft, and hence the observed lidar measurement point (after Holden et al. 2002).
upon it. The width of the scanned area is limited by the need to avoid obscuration of the ground by the laser beam encountering buildings and trees. The locations of the points are computed with reference to a geographical positioning system, and the three-dimensional co-ordinates are used to generate an accurate digital model of the surface of the ground (a digital surface model or DSM) (Figure 1).
  The simplest way of viewing the DSM is to represent the height by either colour coding, as in a normal atlas, or use of a continuous grey scale. In conventional aerial photography, slight earthworks are greatly enhanced by low oblique illumination, and the digital surface from the lidar survey can be illuminated


Figure 2. Relief-shaded image for the west end of the Cursus where it passes through Fargo Plantation, illuminated from the north-east.
artificially with a ‘digital sun’, as in the example of the Cursus from the Stonehenge survey shown in Figure 2. This picture contains several new features as can be seen in Figure 3. The previously known archaeological features in the Stonehenge study area (in yellow) allow new lines of field banks to be distinguished (in blue). These lie both within the Cursus and overlying the northern Cursus bank to the east of Fargo Plantation. The north-south bank within the Cursus is almost certainly the feature recorded by Philip Crocker in his ‘Map of Stonehenge and its Environs’ for Colt Hoare’s Ancient History of South Wiltshire (Hoare 1812). The low oblique illumination also highlights an antiquarian excavation in the top of the large bell barrow to the south of the Cursus (marked with an arrow, Figure 3).
  The fine horizontal banding within the relief-shaded image (Figure 2) is from the high frequency noise associated with the lidar measurements. It can be reduced by digitally smoothing the image, but this may also degrade detail of archaeological value. Awareness of the ‘digital artefacts’ that are associated with lidar survey enables interpreters to discount them, in the same way that air photo interpreters may choose to filter out features associated with agriculture and geology. Ideally the direction of the digital illumination is changed interactively to aid interpretation, but this can be too computationally intensive for many
Figure 3. A larger version of the area shown in Figure 2, with the lidar digital terrain model relief-shaded from the north-west, the vegetation of Fargo Plantation digitally removed, the NMP aerial photographic transcription (in yellow) overlaid, with newly found features (in blue). Removal of trees further reveals surviving mainly east-west field banks (top) that join adjacent known and new features, and are crossed diagonally by the cutting of the former military railway. Monarch of Plain barrow indicated by red arrow.
computers and the alternative of comparing static images shaded from different directions is more effective.
Analysis and assessment
The Stonehenge World Heritage Site mapping project (SWHSMP), carried out between March and July 2001, covered the whole of the Stonehenge World Heritage Site (WHS) and all land lying on any Ordnance Survey 1:10 000 quarter sheet containing part of the World Heritage Site (Crutchley 2002). The survey was required to meet the standards of English Heritage’s National Mapping Programme (NMP) (Bewley 2001), but with the A303 corridor area mapped at 1:2500 scale. It re-assessed and built upon previous field and aerial investigations, and added a large amount of new information to the record, mainly extensions to field systems and barrow cemeteries, but it also discovered a number of entirely new sites. Because of the intensity of previous investigations, including the NMP survey, it was not expected that lidar would find very much that was new, but rather that this study would be a test to see how many known sites could be detected, with the added benefit of knowing which were still extant above ground and not completely levelled by the plough. In fact the results far exceeded expectations. Here we distinguish seven ways in which the lidar

Figure 4. Prehistoric fields north-east of the Winterbourne Stoke Barrow group (lower left) with newly identified features completing the plan of the fields in blue. Underlying lidar data lit from the north.
survey contributes to the study of the Stonehenge landscape, each of which has significant pointers for future management and research.
  First, lidar made locational corrections to the existing record. Comparing the lidar survey with the pre-existing map showed that in several cases there was a clear discrepancy between the ground position of features recorded from the older aerial photographs and those recorded by lidar. Given the scale of the photographs used and the scale of ground control (1:10 000 OS base maps) NMP generally expects an accuracy of 5-15m, but since lidar can map to within 0.15m it should be seen as the more accurate survey.
  Lidar added new sites and extensions to sites that were previously known. Many of these were sub-divisions of field systems, particularly cross-banks, running perpendicular to the main alignment of the fields, and shown up by lighting from unusual angles. A particularly good example of this occurs in the field system to the north-east of the Winterbourne Stoke crossroads barrow group (c SU107422), where aerial photographs had previously shown cropmarks of a number of field banks running north-east-south-west (Figure 4, in yellow). Lighting from the south-west now revealed the cross-banks running north-west-south-east completing the definition of these small regular fields (Figure 4, in blue). Another area of previously unrecorded fields is that to the immediate east of the henge at Durrington Walls (c SU153438). Here there are some apparent slight banks forming a regular pattern on the
Figure 5. Newly identified banks (blue) defining fields of probable prehistoric date in an area east of Durrington Walls (yellow bank hachures and ditch-solid colour). Underlying lidar data lit from the north.


Figure 6. Field systems to the south of Winterbourne Stoke Crossroads (top left) and west of Lake barrow group (lower right). Lidar image relief-shaded from the north.
slopes above the Avon, and although there are some possible field boundaries marked on the OS 1st edition they are not on the same alignment. Indeed the banks visible through lidar are aligned roughly north-eastsouth-west, an alignment they share with the bulk of the prehistoric fields across the Stonehenge area (Figure 5). The survey also picked up two possible barrows south-east of Larkhill church (c SU139440), and showed that the Lesser Cursus, known as a cropmark and assumed to have been entirely levelled by ploughing, still existed as a slight variation in height.
  Many other sites, thought to have been levelled by ploughing, were shown by lidar to have actually survived as slight earthworks. Figure 6 shows the surviving surface evidence of the field systems south of Winterbourne Stoke Crossroads in the west of the World

Heritage Site. Profiles measured in the lidar data across the field boundaries indicate that they survive as banks between 20 and 50cm in height. The situation is similar for the 50 hectares of field system in the arable fields immediately to the west of Stonehenge (Figure 4), where again the field banks are low but present.
  The availability of procedures for the digital elimination of surface features, such as trees and buildings, to create accurate digital terrain models (DTM) are an important facility in lidar research. The particular value of this can be seen by the image of a treeless Fargo Plantation, which reveals extensions to the known field system and the curving path of the former military railway, which are currently under extensive tree cover (Figure 3, compare Figure 2). The lidar digital terrain model, with modern surface features effectively removed, allowsustoexplorethelandscaperelationshipsofmonumentsandtheintervisibilitybetween them without the intrusion of recent woodland and buildings, in much more detail than before (compare Exon et al. 2000).
  Viewshed analysis uses the digital terrain or digital surface model to determine which areas of the landscape are visible from a specified position within it. Whether detail can be perceived will depend upon distance and the visual acuity of the observer. Features, such as the Normanton Down, King Barrow, and Cursus Group barrow cemeteries, at the periphery of the viewshed (Figure 7) from the centre of Stonehenge (NGR 412246, 142193, 102.53m above ODN) are situated on either near, intermediate, horizons (Normanton and Cursus Group) or the far horizon (King Barrow Ridge), depending on the topography of the landscape beyond them. Observers standing by the barrows can see Stonehenge, but are themselves difficult to see from the monument. This viewshed calculated from the digital terrain model shows the extent of the view of the eastern end of the Cursus from Stonehenge and the view towards Lark Hill, in the direction of the Avenue and midsummer sunrise, that was possible before the intervention of buildings and trees. The large ‘Monarch of the Plain’ barrow (Figure 7) was constructed in a particular position at the junction of two ridgelines, where, without the intrusion of Fargo Plantation, it could be seen from Stonehenge to be outlined against the evening sky. The barrow is in a complementary position towards the north-west to that occupied by the prominent Coneybury King Barrow on the skyline to the south-east of Stonehenge. The Lesser Cursus can be seen to be located on the side of the ridgeline that, but for Fargo Plantation, is visible from Stonehenge. More importantly, in terms of its purpose and the ceremonies that may have taken place within it, the eastern extension (Richards 1990: 76) of the Lesser Cursus lies in the direct path from Stonehenge of midsummer sunset.
  Topographic relationships can be further clarified in the lidar terrain model by overlaying the relief-shaded image with close interval (1m) raster contours generated from the digital terrain model. Figure 8 shows how the group of seven Neolithic long barrows in the western part of the World Heritage Site occupy very specific locations on the forward slopes of ridges around the western arm of the Stonehenge Bottom dry valley system. Shell and Roughley (2004) have noted a similar selection of specific, local, topographic positions for megalithic burial monuments in the Carnac region. Clearly apparent also in Figure 8 is the well-known positioning on ridgelines of the Normanton Down and Winterbourne Stoke Crossroads Early Bronze Age linear barrow cemeteries, in locations which give them prominent visibility from either side of their respective ridgelines. We can see that Bush
Figure 7. Viewshed from 1.5 metres above the centre of Stonehenge (S), unobscured by trees and buildings and the stones of the monument itself, with site detail from the Wiltshire County Sites and Monuments Record. Green areas are not visible from Stonehenge. Barrow cemeteries: Cursus (C), King Barrow Ridge (K), and Normanton (N); and Monarch of Plain (M) and Coneybury King (B) barrows.
Barrow, with its rich Wessex gold grave goods, occupies the highest point of the Normanton Down ridge.
  The multi-spectral CASI imagery, obtained at the same time as the lidar topographic data, can be used not only to assist in the identification of sites, but also, by virtue of the varying reflectivity of vegetation and bare soil in the fourteen discrete wavebands recorded with the CASI 3 instrument, can indicate the state of the vegetation, where for instance it may have been subject to animal- or visitor-related damage. Figure 9, showing the western end of the Cursus, illustrates this with a ‘true colour’ CASI image for comparison with a band combination that emphasises both the differences between coniferous and different types of deciduous trees in Fargo Plantation and the bare soil of the footpath across the Cursus at the eastern edge of the plantation. Lastly, with appropriate visualisation software and hardware, the CASI images themselves can be combined with the digital terrain model to allow comprehensive interactive study of the landscape (Figure 10).

Figure 8. Relief shaded image with 1m interval raster contours showing the topographic location of the Neolithic long barrows (yellow squares) around the dry valley system in the western part of the WHS, and the location of Bush Barrow (red arrow). Linear barrow cemeteries on ridgelines: Winterbourne Stoke (top left) and Normanton Down (mainly to right of Bush Barrow).

Figure 9. CASI 3 true and false colour images showing the contrast between the coniferous and leafless deciduous trees (two colours) in Fargo Plantation, with the false colour image, generated from, green, red and infrared bands emphasising the bare soil of the narrow footpath across the Cursus at the eastern edge of the plantation.
Conclusions
The Stonehenge survey has highlighted several key applications and advantages of lidar survey. The technique reveals new details and new levels of survival even in well-researched landscapes. Research is clearly served by the discovery of new sites and extensions to those already known, and lidar also provides a vital tool for management programmes. The ability of lidar to detect the positive surface-traces of features believed to lie only below ground may require a reconsideration of the definition of ‘no visible surface expression’ in the conservation plan of a site. Lidar evidence may also have a particular role in future decisions as to where agri-environmental payments to support reversion to pasture should be targeted. The composition of management plans and conservation plans, in particular, are enriched by lidar information and the facility for demonstrating the historic assets of landscapes in a highly accessible manner is of the greatest value to resource managers. It is our view that the use of lidar in archaeology, will, over the next decade, be as significant as the introduction of aerial photography was in the 1920s, and its potential should be embraced more rapidly than was initially the case for aerial photographic survey.
Technical details
An average ground point interval of 1m is achieved by flying at 1000m altitude at 70m/s (130 knots), with a lidar scan angle of +?13 degrees, 35 scans per second and 33 000 readings per second. This measures a swath of ground 450m wide. Typically points are measured at an average ground sampling distance (GSD) of between 0.5 and 2.0m, depending upon the purpose of the survey, with a relative positional accuracy in each dimension in the region of 15cm.
  Surveys are flown with a lateral overlap between adjacent swaths to avoid loss of data because of the varying altitude of the aircraft. Similarly the aircraft must be flown in flat turns (i.e. with minimal roll) in manoeuvring between runs to avoid loss of lock/signal of any of the satellites currently being recorded. A small number of cross swaths is often flown to assist in the matching of adjacent swaths in the post-processing. The lidar records the first and last return for each pulse. The beam at the ground is about 25cm in diameter and may encounter leaves at the tops of trees as well as record a return from the ground surface below. The intensity of the reflected laser beam is also measured and can be used to create a reflectivity image of the scene. Alternatively the scene can be simultaneously recorded with an airborne digital sensor (Holden et al. 2002) or separately photographed with a vertical survey camera (Roughley 2004). As well as providing images which can be combined with the digital surface model (DSM) to create a 3D visualisation of the landscape, the imagery can assist in the subsequent processing of the data to remove surface features and generate a digital terrain model (DTM).
  A dual-frequency global positioning system (GPS) records the aircraft’s position every second and an inertial measurement unit (IMU) records the aircraft’s roll, pitch, yaw and heading at up to 200 times per second. The points in the processed data are located with respect to the world satellite coordinate system (WGS84, ETRS89 for Europe). In order to use the data with other digital information geo-referenced to the British Ordnance Survey national grid (in our case the 1:2500 OS digital mapping, the National Mapping Programme air photo interpretations and transcriptions and the Wiltshire County Sites and Monuments Record for the Stonehenge area), the data must be re-projected into the national grid coordinate system using the specific National Grid Transformation OSTN02 (ETRS89-OSGB36), and the National Geoid model OSGM02 (ETRS89-ODN) for heights above ordnance datum. The data can be retained as the original point measurements, from which can be created a triangular irregular network (TIN) surface model, often used with 3D visualisation software, or converted to a regular grid of specific spacing (in our case 1m) with interpolation of missing data where it may occur. In this form the DSM/DTM is more readily integrated with other vector data and raster imagery in GIS and remote sensing software. The Environment Agency supplies its data in gridded form in 2km by 2km OS national grid squares. More information on high precision GPS survey can be obtained from the Ordnance Survey GPS website (http://www.gps.gov.uk).
  The Stonehenge lidar survey included also 1m GSD imagery from a CASI 3 (compact airborne spectrographic imager) digital sensor, which records up to fourteen spectral bands between blue (430nm) and near infra-red (900nm). These images are also fully georeferenced and can be viewed in different band combinations to enhance features of interest, such as vegetational stress and the detection of bare soil. In the earlier digital study of monuments in the Stonehenge landscape, Exon et al. (2000) were restricted to using a digital terrain model (DTM) of point heights on a 50m interval grid, with height uncertainty of the order of 5m. In comparison, moving from this to a lidar dataset of 1m GSD with a three-dimensional positional accuracy in the region of 0.15m is analogous to the gap in precision between the 30m resolution LANDSAT satellite imagery and conventional aerial photography. The majority of existing Environment Agency lidar data has been recorded at a 2m average GSD, which is sufficient resolution for flood hazard modelling, but does not reveal details of archaeological features as well as 1m GSD data. Higher resolution 0.5m GSD data is capable of revealing even finer detail, such as relict cultivation marks in modern pasture (Shell & Roughley 2004).
Acknowledgements
Copyright of all the images belongs to the authors and to English Heritage. The authors are grateful to Chris Scull, English Heritage Archaeology Commissions, Nick Holden and Alistair Duncan, Environment Agency, Science Group-Technology, all those staff in Aerial Survey who contributed to the interpretation and mapping of the Stonehenge landscape and Roy Canham, Wiltshire County Council.

References
Batchelor, D. 1997. Mapping the Stonehenge World Heritage Site, in B. Cunliffe & C. Renfrew (ed.) Science and Stonehenge: 61-72. London: British Academy.
Bewley, R. 2001. Understanding England’s historic landscapes: an aerial perspective. Landscapes 2.1: 74-84.
Cleal, R.M.J., K.E. Walker & R. Montague. 1995.
Stonehenge in its landscape. Twentieth century excavations. English Heritage Archaeological Report 10. London: English Heritage.
Crutchley, S. 2001. The landscape of Salisbury Plain, as revealed by aerial photography. Landscapes 2.1: 46-64.
–2002. Stonehenge World Heritage Site mapping project: management report. AER/14/2002. Swindon: English Heritage.
Exon, S., V. Gaffney, A. Woodward & R. Yorston.
2000. Stonehenge landscapes: journeys through real-and-imagined worlds. Oxford: Archaeopress.
Hoare, R.C. 1812. The ancient history of South Wiltshire. London: William Miller.
Holden, N., P. Horne & R.H. Bewley. 2002.
High-resolution digital airborne mapping and
Archaeology, in R. Bewley & W. Raczkowski (ed.)
Aerial archaeology: developing future practice: 173-80. NATO Series 1: vol. 337. Amsterdam: IOS Press.
McOmish, D., D. Field & G. Brown. 2002. The field archaeology of Salisbury Plain training area. London: English Heritage.
Richards J. 1990. The Stonehenge environs project.
English Heritage Archaeological Report 16. London: English Heritage.
Roughley, C.F. 2004. The Neolithic landscape of the Carnac region, Brittany: new insights from digital approaches. Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society 70: 153-72.
RCHME. 1979. Stonehenge and its environs. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
RCHME. 1984. Danebury an Iron Age hillfort in
Hampshire, an aerial photographic interpretation of its environs. RCHME supplementary series no. 6.
Shell, C.A. & C.F. Roughley. 2004. Exploring the Loughcrew landscape: a new approach with airborne lidar. Archaeology Ireland 18, no. 2, issue no. 68: 20-3.
St Joseph, J.K.S. (ed.). 1966. The uses of air photography: nature and man in a new perspective. London: John Baker.
Stoertz, C. 1997. Ancient landscapes of the Yorkshire Wolds. RCHME.
Wilson D.R. 2000. Air photo interpretation for archaeologists. Stroud: Tempus.
1 English Heritage, 29 Queen Square, Bristol BS1 4ND, UK (Email: bob.bewley@english-heritage.org.uk)
2 English Heritage, Kemble Drive, Swindon SN2 2GZ, UK
3 Department of Archaeology, University of Cambridge, Downing Street, Cambridge CB2 3DZ, UK
Received: 6 August 2004; Accepted: 14 March 2005; Revised: 2 May 2005 antiquity 79 (2005): 636–647
---------------

------------------------------------------------------------

---------------

------------------------------------------------------------

Lidar survey in the Stonehenge World Heritage Site

R.H. Bewley, S.P. Crutchley & C.A. Shell

636

637



636

