New era for Stonehenge
Christopher Chippindale1, Chris Gosden2, N. James3, Mike Pitts4 & Chris Scarre5
ProvisionforvisitingStonehengewasradically reorganised in 2013. Why was it so difficult to achieve? Will the new scheme work? Here we present a multi-part review of the new arrangements. Christopher Chippindale is a former editor of Antiquity and author of Stonehenge complete, which recounts the changing fortunes of the monument down the ages. Mike Pitts has excavated at Stonehenge and written about the site in Hengeworld. Chris Gosden, Professor of European
Archaeology at Oxford, approaches the issues from a World Heritage Site perspective. The section is co-ordinated by N. James who reviews the effectiveness of a visitor centre several minutes by land train from the stones.
Assessments
N. James
Last December, English Heritage, the government’s archaeological agency, opened a new scheme for access to Stonehenge (Figure 1). Sandwiched by roads and lumbered with tourist infrastructure, the site had become perplexing for visitors, if not downright frustrating. The new provisions suggest how, together, visitor management and interpretation can serve preservation. For Stonehenge itself, they go a long way to settling nearly a century of scandal.
  The roads were the basic problem (Figure 2). The lesser one, the A344, giving access to the site, passed within inches of the Heel Stone between Stonehenge and the Avenue. The main road (A303), from Amesbury and London to the West Country, is further away but noisy (often echoed by artillery practice). As Christopher Chippindale notes below, the roads are part of the landscape’s long story but, although archaeologists can still trace it, the A344 has now been closed.
1 McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research, University of Cambridge, Downing Street, Cambridge CB2 3ER, UK
2 Institute of Archaeology, University of Oxford, Beaumont Street, Oxford OX1 2PG, UK
3 Division of Archaeology, University of Cambridge, Downing Street, Cambridge CB2 3DZ, UK
4 Marlborough SN8 1JQ, UK
5 Antiquity, Department of Archaeology, Durham University, South Road, Durham DH1 3LE, UK
C Antiquity Publications Ltd.
ANTIQUITY 88 (2014): 644–657	http://antiquity.ac.uk/ant/088/ant0880644.htm
644

Figure 1. Presentation of the stones (photograph courtesy of M. Pitts).
  So a new site was needed for receiving visitors. The most demanding requirements were that it had to respect both Stonehenge’s visual setting and its archaeological context. They have been met by placing a ‘visitor centre’ at Airman’s Cross, a little over 2.5km west of the monument. There was very little archaeological evidence there but the building occupies its ground lightly, on a stone raft. To Chippindale, it is obtrusive but Chris Gosden acknowledges (below) the effort to respect its surroundings (Figure 3).
  The visitor centre serves to orientate us. It includes an exhibition of finds assembled by English Heritage, Salisbury Museum and the Wiltshire Museum; and Cambridge University has lent its skeleton from the Winterbourne Stoke long barrow. To carry us from the visitor centre to the stones, the bed of the A344 has been retained for quirky ‘land trains’ of trailers (Figure 2). The first fortnight of opening showed that visitor numbers may have been underestimated and, allegedly, managers are already considering the feasibility of staggering arrivals by means of a more extensive car park (for the irony, compare Chippindale). From the land train, visitors walk around the stones along a path similar to the route used for the past 35 years. Entry costs an adult nearly £14, booked in advance (compare £17 for Dover Castle and more than £21 to the Tower of London).
  The work was funded by English Heritage, the Heritage Lottery Fund, the Wolfson Foundation, the Garfield Weston Foundation and the Linbury Trust. Our intention here is to mark it as an auspicious turn in the monument’s life. As Chris Scarre says below, Stonehenge always was Antiquity’s cause favoris´ee. Chippindale shows how catering for multitudes of
  

Figure 2. The new approach is from Airman’s Cross (upper left). The ‘visitor shuttle’ or land train follows the line of a road (A344) that continued between Stonehenge and the Avenue to join the A303 where that road bends (at right). The way to Rollestone Camp is the B3086 (upper left). The dashed green lines are suggested walking routes. (Image courtesy of English
Heritage, annotated.)
  

Figure 3. The new visitor centre, Airman’s Cross at right (photograph courtesy of M. Pitts).
visitors affects both the monument itself and its landscape. Mike Pitts appraises what we now learn of the prehistory; and there follows an analysis of the new method for managing visitors. Chris Gosden then complements Scarre (and Jacquetta Hawkes’s famous aphorism that Scarre cites) by picking out symbolic implications of the continuing debate about how to preserve and present the stones.
Controversy and compromise
Chris Scarre
Britain’s premier prehistoric monument has featured regularly in our pages since the very first volume. Stonehenge has an iconic value for Antiquity: our logo, since the 1920s, has been an elegant woodcut of the central sarsen stones (originally designed for O.G.S. Crawford by Ellis Martin, a colleague at the Ordnance Survey (Hauser 2006: 93)). The proposal to build bungalows opposite the stones drew the ire of our founder in his third editorial: ‘[r]eaders ... will need no editorial promptings to support the scheme to thwart this vandalism’ (Crawford 1927: 259). Robert Newall (1929), assistant to Hawley’s excavations of the 1920s, provided a description of the monument two years later, drawing attention to the recently discovered origin of the bluestones. Stonehenge featured again in the 1960s, during the archaeoastronomy debate (Atkinson 1966; Hoyle 1966), inspiring the famous retort that “[e]very age has the Stonehenge it deserves—or desires” (Hawkes 1967: 174). Most recently, new excavations in and around Stonehenge have provided a revised chronology and thrown exciting new light on the development of the monument and its landscape (Parker Pearson et al. 2007, 2009; Thomas et al. 2009; Darvill et al. 2012).
  But whereas research has flourished at Stonehenge, the visitor arrangements have been conspicuously less successful. Their sorry state is part of a long history stretching back more than a century. Sir Edward Antrobus, then owner of the stones, charged a shilling for access in 1901. Military clutter blighted the site throughout the 1920s, until the National Trust took charge and the buildings were torn down. Photographs from the 1930s show a modest ticket kiosk and toilet, but the first car park was laid out as early as 1935. Relatively unobtrusive, even those arrangements drew criticism from some who found any modern buildings so close to the stones an intrusion. For landscape artist John Piper, writing in the Architectural Review (1949: 182), they were nothing less than “a clearly visible eyesore”, but they at least were considerably better than the new visitor centre and car park arrangements of the 1960s, famously described by the House of Commons Public Accounts Committee in 1993 as a “national disgrace” (Parliament 2011). For many years visitors could wander freely among the stones. During my first summer visit in the 1960s, it resembled more a children’s playground than a protected monument; but in 1978 the free-for-all was ended, the stones roped off, and a prescribed walkway laid to guide visitors between the outer bank and the inner circles. That was definitely an improvement. But the scandal of the visitor arrangements remained.
  The continuing controversy has featured regularly in Antiquity. Successive editors have highlighted the problems of site and visitor management, and have tracked the troubled history of proposals and counter-proposals (Chippindale 1983, 1995, 1996, 1997; Malone & Stoddart 1998; Carver 2010). Geoffrey Wainwright, then Head of Archaeology at English Heritage, set out the problems anew in 1996: “[t]he setting of the monument is marred by the continuous stream of vehicles passing along the A303 and A344. The free car-park is a hideous intrusion on the landscape, and 700 000 visitors each year trudge through a concrete underpass to reach the monument, whilst unknown numbers risk life and limb to rush across the A344 in order to get a free view ... and to stroke the Heel Stone just inside the wire fence” (Wainwright 1996: 9). A number of options were set out at that time, including closure of the A344 and removal of the A303 to a tunnel where it passes the site. The tunnel proposal drew particular concern from archaeologists and was eventually withdrawn on cost grounds. A revised Master Plan was announced shortly afterwards (Wainwright 2000), still incorporating the tunnel proposal, but this too failed to win support from many archaeologists (Baxter & Chippindale 2000; Fielden 2000; Kennet & Young 2000).
  The scheme finally unveiled at the end of 2013 is essentially a partial realisation of the Master Plan from 2000 (English Heritage & National Trust 2000). We have a visitor centre, removed from the immediate vicinity of the site, and the suppression of the A344 that divorced the stones from the Avenue and the immediate landscape (Figure 2). If the busy A303 continues to rumble just a short distance away, that is perhaps an acceptable compromise and less damaging to the archaeology than the disruptive tunnel-building that was once proposed.
Criteria
Christopher Chippindale
Decisions, whether mundane or major, are made easier if there is a considered, crisp and agreed list of what must happen and what must not. But perhaps no possible way forward exists which matches the list’s requirements.
  In more than 30 years of debate about and planning for visitor provision at Stonehenge, varied schemes have been successively explored, with each failing to fulfil one or other implicit or explicit criterion. Because Stonehenge is so famous, the venture is a high-profile and very public project both for English Heritage, which manages the stone circle and a few hectares around it, and for the National Trust, the voluntary association which owns a large estate around it.
  The pattern of successive plans is not self-evident, and perhaps the promoters have been themselves unaware of it. It has not helped that enthusiasm and a reasonable desire to gain public and funding support meant that each project was presented as the perfect solution, even though quite different from the previous ‘perfect solution’ advocated just a year or two earlier. Never has it been said, ‘requirement A has been given up because we now see requirement B as more important; and no solution provides both’.
To the 1950s: unplanned
For over 40 centuries the stones, high on the open downland, were “protected by their own weight and worthlessness” (Fuller 1837 [1655]: 62). In the mid nineteenth century a guardian began to attend, hoping to protect them from the litter and hammers of a growing number of visitors and souvenir-hunters. In 1901, the stones were fenced, and visitors required to pay, a few thousand in that first year. In 1918, they were given to the nation.
  Miraculously, a century ago there was not a single modern building near Stonehenge, only the two eighteenth-century highways, one cutting through the northern edge of the site. But then the military encroached, building a Stonehenge Aerodrome immediately to the west in the 1914–18 war. Afterwards, the airfield was used for warehousing bricks and its buildings then made into a pig farm. A pair of cottages was constructed for site guardians, a Stonehenge Cafe was built across the road to welcome visitors, and a Stonehenge bungalow´ park proposed. So, in the 1920s, the Wiltshire archaeologists, seeing the stones safe but their surroundings at risk, led a ‘Save Stonehenge’ campaign which bought many hundreds of hectares of land encircling the stones and gave it to the National Trust as the organisation best able to safeguard it in perpetuity. Ever since, managing Stonehenge and its setting has been a matter between a government office or agency and the Trust.
  As early as the 1930s, this new dream began to be compromised. More numerous visitors, arriving in their own motorcars rather than horse-drawn vehicles, parked beside the north road, wrecking the grass verges. As numbers further grew in the 1950s, so did the need for car-parking, toilets, shelter for the growing number of guardians. All this was built on the other side of the northern road—modern and ugly clutter on land so recently purchased by public subscription expressly to prevent a sprawl of ugly modern clutter!
1960s–2000s: four plans
The numbers continued to grow. There was a special danger in visitors crossing the northern road—straight, fast and with a blind approach from the east—from the car-park to the entrance to the stones’ enclosure. There were nasty accidents. So a tunnel was designed from the car-park to the stones’ precinct, together with a semi-underground facilities building. Built in 1968, it was then variously modified and enlarged with cafe, shop, overflow toilets´ and overflow car-park (and overflows to the overflow car-park). These provisions—Plan 1—persisted until 2013.
  Within 15 years, what had seemed obvious and sensible in the late 1960s was seen as a bad mistake. The visitor provision was much too close to the stones and, because too close, was squashed with too little space and therefore poor facilities. In Plan 2, its replacement was put about a kilometre to the north, at Larkhill, close enough for visitors to walk to the stones from it and with existing paths, far enough away to allow a bigger site with better provision, and cunningly placed where it would be comparatively unobtrusive (Figure 2). But it was largely a greenfield site, where no buildings had been before; and it required a new access road, for which no route could easily be found which did not damage prehistoric remains. And, as the vision for Stonehenge began to envisage closing, diverting or putting into a tunnel the two main roads, it would be perverse at the same time to construct a new highway for visitors across the selfsame landscape.
  A better plan, a Plan 3, was needed. How could both a greenfield site in open country and a new access road be avoided? By finding a brownfield site adjacent to an existing road! In the 1990s, a semi-brownfield site was found in the straggling northern edge of Amesbury and adjacent to two main roads. But because it was 4km away, too far to expect visitors to walk, some kind of land train would be needed to take them at least most of the way; and these vehicles entailed a roadway with a terminus, and perhaps new-built walking paths from that terminus to the stones. Rather the same new-build problem as Plan 2.
  Enter Plan 4 (see Figure 2). If a new-build road, either for visitors’ own cars or access land trains, is ruled out, then an existing road must be used. Since plans to divert the southern trunk road away from Stonehenge or to bury it in a tunnel have failed, it still occupies this surface line, which is therefore unavailable for visitors’ access to the monument. That leaves the northern east–west road, the A344. The eastern part is useless, as in a few hundred metres it merges with the other road in a ‘Y’ junction. So the only route available is the part going west from Stonehenge. That is what the new scheme has adopted for land trains. Therefore the visitor centre must be placed on or near the A344, between Stonehenge and Airman’s Cross, beyond which the A344 still has to function as an ordinary public highway. The new visitor centre is there, at Airman’s Cross, on former farmland purchased for the purpose. However good the design and visitor provision, this location has two drawbacks. It is a greenfield site (no major prehistoric site was found). And it lies far from any buildings within a broad and open bowl of downland where it makes a big visual intrusion. It is this Plan 4 which has been built.
  It is not the case that each plan carries forward the virtues of its predecessor, adding new merits. No solution exists which gives all the things we desire; each change has both pros and cons. Figure 4 sums the story up as a series of arguments for and against.

Figure 4. Successive plans (1–4) for visitor management: merits and problems.
Plan 5: more pros with fewer cons
Is there, could there have been a Plan 5? One in which all desired criteria were satisfied? Maybe. Was it not possible to have the pluses of Plan 4 without the greenfield and such a visually exposed site? Maybe. A Plan 5 must also be on or near the former road west of Stonehenge to avoid the new road-building which torpedoed Plans 2 and 3. Now, when going west from Stonehenge, instead of stopping at Airman’s Cross, one there turns north on a minor road and then comes, in about 2km, to Rollestone Camp (Figure 2). The Camp is quite a large site with many low-rise utilitarian huts. It has had varied military and security uses. It offers a brownfield site, fairly conspicuous but certainly less obtrusive than Airman’s Cross. But it is even further distant from Stonehenge, and would need the minor road up from Airman’s Cross to be closed or shared by public traffic and visitors’ land trains. Rollestone Camp was shortlisted alongside Airman’s Cross as an option under Plan 4 but not preferred. I prefer it—without the inside information of knowing if it was actually available. Rollestone and much of the land north of Stonehenge is government-owned and under intense military use so there may be security considerations not declared to the public and not known to me. So this ‘better’ Plan 5 brings its own minuses and, indeed, may be ruled out for reasons not known in public.
Ownership
This speedy analysis must omit the many details and nuances in the several thousand pages of informed and expert studies made public about the Stonehenge problem over the years. Internal discussions within and between English Heritage and the National Trust, as the two heritage bodies owning the monument and its setting, are understandably largely confidential.
  One notices that Plan 4 (and also Plan 5) puts the new visitor centre and its access routes entirely off the National Trust land. The unplanned phase and then Plans 1 to 3 did not. In the light of what went wrong in the 1930s, one could reasonably have made a further condition: visitor centre and access routes must be off National Trust land-holdings. If such a desire or condition exists, then it has been satisfied.
Interpretation
Mike Pitts
First reactions to the changes at Stonehenge focused on the architecture (Figure 3), the removal of a road, parking, ticket queues, and transport between the visitor centre and the stones. What in the long term may prove to be more significant—and will particularly interest archaeologists—went almost unnoticed: the total re-invention of what people are told about what they have come to see.
  Before the new centre opened, the visitor could buy a guidebook, supplemented in recent decades by an audio tour on a handset (“Welcome to Stonehenge”, it began. “Make your way to the tunnel”—a reference to the concrete underpass below the now-absent road). The book and audio tour have been revised. The latter is longer than before, with more options. (You can download it from iTunes onto your own equipment for free: look for ‘Stonehenge Audio Tour’ on the English Heritage website.) The rest, however, is completely new.
  The most obvious difference is scale. Inside the centre there are two large projected visual displays, a permanent exhibition, handling models, an audio-visual point, a wall of quotations, a world time-line, and a temporary exhibition with its own souvenir booklet. Immediately outside are ‘Neolithic’ houses—under construction when we visited— imagined on the basis of remains excavated nearby at Durrington Walls (Parker Pearson et al. 2007), a mock megalith on rollers (see how hard it is to move) and, there and in the wider landscape, 23 information panels. The multiplication in texts and images is substantial.
  The core of all this is the exhibition. There is no strict sequence to the displays but the unnumbered cases are classified by one of three eras: ‘The time of Stonehenge’, 3000–2200 BC; before it, 3700–3000 BC; and ‘After Stonehenge was built’, 2200–1600 BC. Against a wall are resin models of Stonehenge with panels that describe three phases in ‘The time of Stonehenge’ (essentially earthworks, stones and stones adjusted). All of this is followed with more detail in the guidebook (Richards 2013). The remains of one person represent each era—cremated bone for Stonehenge, and skeletons for before and after. The case panels are headed with questions such as ‘How was Stonehenge built?’ (about the stones) or ‘Who built Stonehenge?’ (about Durrington Walls). However, the stalwart of guides since 1953, and just about any description of the monument (for example, as currently on Wikipedia), is conspicuously absent: that is, a technical arrangement of earthworks and megaliths into three phases with subdivisions, as debated and revised since its origins in the 1920s. Traditionalists may miss it; others will be delighted (see Parker Pearson et al. 2007).
  The audio-visual presentation is shown on four small screens set among large panels bearing mantra-like texts. “Stonehenge is part of a complex prehistoric landscape”, says one; “The purpose of Stonehenge is lost to us. There will always be debate about its meaning”, says another. In five short videos, a narrator talks about Stonehenge’s many meanings, describes the historical origins of the Druid connection, and reviews Gerald Hawkins’s astronomical ideas; and Mike Parker Pearson and Tim Darvill talk about their respective theories of ancestral domains and healing stones.
  At a site that previously had almost nothing for the visitor, and where a million people a year will need to be helped and managed, an extraordinary amount of information has been provided. I could find nothing ‘wrong’, while many current topics are fairly represented. The cremation burials at Stonehenge, for example, long overlooked, take their proper place in the story. The Aubrey Holes are described not as empty pits, but as having held posts or stones (the impressive diorama video opts for stones). The audio tour draws attention to the ‘back’ of Stonehenge, where the stones are less carefully dressed. These, and many similar points, derive from new research, some not yet fully published.
  The avoidance of certainty in interpretations again reflects current academic thinking. Meanings are elusive—but matter nonetheless. Visitors can wander selectively among cases and panels without feeling lost, as the presentations are thematic, not rigidly narrative. And there is no shortage of material to engage someone with time on their hands, or to reward the prepared tour guide looking for items to single out for their group.
  There are gaps. At the visitor centre, there is a curious lack of models or illustrations showing megaliths being moved or raised. There is little attempt to set Stonehenge into a big prehistoric story—not just of monuments, but of changing technologies, societies and visions. The fascinating history of what happened after the Bronze Age is expressed only in the last few pages of the guidebook and—importantly—in the explanatory panel at the Airman’s Cross by the visitor centre (commemorating the first British army personnel killed while flying on duty, in 1912; relocated due to road alterations; Figure 3).
  Such omissions must result from necessary decisions about what to say in the available space. Certainly nothing that is there is redundant. The temporary exhibition gallery will allow further topics to be addressed and, if kept in print, exhibition guides could provide a growing library of useful information based on new research. From a series of presentations that seem to have sprung from nowhere but plainly did not, the effect is astonishing.
Presentation
N. James
More protected from modern distraction, now Stonehenge speaks better for itself. The big problem, as Chippindale shows, is the distance between the monument and facilities for visitors. There is a minimum and a maximum. The optimum varies with the content and techniques of presentation. Pitts has appraised the former. How and how well do the new scheme’s techniques work?
  The visitor centre lies seven or eight minutes by land train from the stones (Figure 2). A footway alongside gives the option of walking. On this route, other than a glimpse of the monument from the ridge at the Fargo Plantation, Stonehenge’s lintels only finally break the skyline some 250m ahead. So that glimpse is important. The visual suspense between the visitor centre and the stones is one of the scheme’s two most distinctive features. The other feature is also a suspense—more puzzling but simpler. For most of us, including the daily coachfuls from London, the main road, from Amesbury and the east, reveals Stonehenge, as before, first ahead and then a few hundred metres to the right before it disappears from view. From that point, with only one road sign to assure us that we have not lost the way, it takes several minutes to reach the visitor centre. Contrast, for example, approaches ancient or modern to the Acropolis in Athens, plain in view along each (James 2009). At Stonehenge, the simplest way to resolve the ambiguity of the approach to the visitor centre is to add another road sign; but the suspense from there to the monument is more awkward since visitors know then that they are approaching the stones directly.
  The new scheme depends on three methods of presentation: the visitor centre itself; signs; and spoken commentary. The striking centre plays a critical role for the scheme (Figure 3); but it is not the most important one.
  The visitor centre serves four functions: admissions; sales of refreshments, souvenirs and books; conveniences; and orientation or museum. The latter is an exhibition introducing Stonehenge. Apt and pithy audio commentary is provided for the price of admission. The presentation begins at the entry to the permanent exhibition with video reconstructions of the site by phases, seen from the middle. The main gallery has a large annotated video of the changing landscape and five tall freestanding cases. Three of them illustrate Stonehenge, one covers the earlier archaeology, and the last the era after building ceased. Labels offer three levels of information. The exhibits are elegantly mounted and clearly lit. Grooved Ware and animal bones from the housing at Durrington Walls are displayed to suggest how that site may complement Stonehenge (Parker Pearson et al. 2007: 631–33) and the Winterbourne Stoke skeleton is shown with a striking reconstruction of the head. There are short films about interpretations from antiquarian to tourist. “What do you think?”, prompts the audio guide more than once.
  Outside, by the reconstructed houses and ‘sarsen’ (see Pitts), awaits the land train. Sign boards continue the presentation. Economical but smart, readable and informative, they are placed by the visitor centre, at the Fargo Plantation, around the stones and beyond (Figure 1). At the Plantation, we can leave the train to walk the remaining kilometre. For that option, the audio guide makes simple observations about the Stonehenge Cursus, the Cursus barrows and the Avenue to the stones. There were plans, at the time of our visit, to add commentary for the land train’s journey too. That is critical and it has now been done (S. Greaney pers. comm.).
  Entry to the henge and among the stones remains restricted. The audio guide explains the rule briefly. The visitor centre could do that instead and better, with implications for preservation at many another monument.
  The distance from the visitor centre to the stones could become an asset by means of signs and the audio guide. Regardless of whether visitors disembark there, English Heritage should make the land train stop at the Fargo ‘Landscape Viewpoint’ (Figure 2). From there, the audio guide, with more capacity than signs for detail and its adaptability to the train or walkers, has the better potential. What, then, of the visitor centre? It is substantial enough to herald an important experience. Impeccably, the displays are interesting yet also modest enough to allow that the main point lies beyond. Indeed, the sensible procedure is to go straight from the ticket booth to Stonehenge and to study the exhibitions afterward. With audio commentary extended, on the land train, to the scenery between the visitor centre and the stones, this new presentation will be difficult to better.
Past debates
Chris Gosden
All the anger and argument around Stonehenge have at last produced a small pearl, in the form of the visitor centre and the arrangements for access. The visitor centre is well sited, out of sight from the monument. On the land train, one can reflect on the prolonged debate that led to the new scheme.
  Arguments over Stonehenge were inevitable for two reasons: the iconic position the site holds both nationally and internationally; the sclerotic state of relations between archaeologists, government and the public. These are further linked to identity, history and money, a heterogeneous but powerful set of factors.
  Through the twentieth century, visitor numbers to Stonehenge rose but visitors also diversified. International tourism took off, guided by a global network of World Heritage Sites (WHS). Stonehenge is one of 28 British sites demonstrating ‘outstanding universal value’, a philosophically difficult notion in this relativist age. Counterposed to global claims has been the growth of a new localism among ‘the Pagans’, ascribing Stonehenge with outstanding particular value. Sometimes modelling themselves on indigenous peoples elsewhere, such groups regard sites like Stonehenge as the manifestations of a long and unbroken history of people, place and beliefs, linking Neoliths, Druids and King Arthur.
Both the general public and many professional archaeologists hold views somewhere between these two: Stonehenge is part of a global history of ritual, religion and belief but provides a link to a British past with its own special histories, set within the rolling green of an ancient landscape. The lesson here is less about brokering consensus than living with difference.
  Given its visitor numbers, Stonehenge is now financially important to English Heritage as a whole. Stonehenge provides a key lesson for current consultation over the future of English Heritage, following a proposal to set up a new dual body split between the tasks of taking physical care of sites and cultivating the understanding of them or their broader cultural relevance. The fear is that the latter body, Historic England, may eventually be cut to shreds, leaving us with no national repository of information on which to base debates about the past, both ancient and relatively modern.
  Seen in an international context, Stonehenge stands out, if we use WHS designation as a measure. The Neolithic is poorly represented everywhere across the world. Stonehenge is the most famous site of the period (including the early Bronze Age). Elsewhere in Europe are the flint mines at Spienne, Belgium, the Bru na B´ oinne in Ireland and the UK’s´ other contribution, Neolithic Orkney. The latter was joined, in 2011, to the interestingly international designation of 111 Neolithic lake villages across Austria, Germany, Italy, France and Slovenia (giving Slovenia its only WHS). The Palaeolithic has its painted caves in France and Spain. The Bronze and Iron Ages are almost unrepresented apart from where sites fall in broader landscapes. Italy (with 49) has the largest number of WHS in the world, with the Greeks, Romans and Renaissance all featuring prominently. Apart from in the UK and Ireland, it would be hard to get a decent argument going over a Neolithic site. Carnac (not a WHS) is materially key to Breton nationalism but not that of France more broadly. Spienne and the lake villages are visited by locals and outsiders but they do not feature in national debates about identity or who owns history.
  World Heritage Sites become such for many reasons, but they act as barometers for national tensions and views of history. The designation statement for the StonehengeAvebury area stresses the creativity in the prolonged construction of the monuments and the preservation of whole landscapes of Neolithic and Bronze Age activity. Brief mention is made of Stonehenge’s local importance: “[t]oday, the [s]ite has spiritual associations for some” (UNESCO 2008). Can we see in these sites a somewhat negative longing for indigeneity in a multicultural society? Claims based on indigenous status in Britain today are politically, morally and factually debatable.
  The protracted debates around Stonehenge were not accidental but structural, deriving from tensions within British society refracted through formal institutions at local and state level. The new arrangements provide more open physical access to the site and the visitor centre conveys a range of views and interpretations within a very attractive building (Figure 3). These are unexpected successes. We should not now ignore the difficulties of the past but use them to understand the arguments of the future.
Acknowledgements
The five of us worked together to mutual benefit. We are very grateful to English Heritage’s Loraine Knowles, Susan Greaney, Heather Sebire, Richard Williams and Simon Banton for encouraging us generously and showing their handiwork on a day that blessed it with a rainbow behind the stones. Ms Greaney and Dr Sebire then helped to refine a draft of our remarks. Figure 4 was designed by NJ.
  CC thanks friends, colleagues and varied public and private bodies for information, expertise and advice over the more than 30 years that he has been enthralled by the ‘Unsolvable Stonehenge Problem’. He declares an interest as a trustee of the Wiltshire Archaeological & Natural History Society when its collaboration in the new scheme was agreed. MP declares an interest as author of ‘Stonehenge for all’ (2003), a report for English
  
Heritage about proposals for presentation.
References
ATKINSON, R.J.C. 1966. Moonshine on Stonehenge. Antiquity 40: 212–16.
BAXTER, I. & C. CHIPPINDALE. 2000. The Stonehenge we don’t deserve. Antiquity 74: 944–46.
CARVER, M. 2010. Editorial. Antiquity 84: 615–20.
CHIPPINDALE, C. 1983. What future for Stonehenge? Antiquity 57: 172–80.
– 1995. Editorial. Antiquity 69: 863–70. – 1996. Editorial. Antiquity 70: 1–8.
– 1997. Editorial. Antiquity 71: 789–98.
CRAWFORD, O.G.S. 1927. Editorial. Antiquity 1: 257–60.
DARVILL, T., P. MARSHALL, M. PARKER PEARSON & G.
WAINWRIGHT. 2012. Stonehenge remodelled. Antiquity 86: 1021–40.
English Heritage & National Trust. 2000. Stonehenge World Heritage Site management plan. London: English Heritage.
FIELDEN, K. 2000. Stonehenge deserves the right road solution. Antiquity 74: 946–49.
FULLER, T. 1837 [1655]. The church history of Britain from the birth of Jesus Christ until the year MDCXLVIII. London: Tegg.
HAUSER, K. 2006. Bloody old Britain: O.G.S. Crawford and the archaeology of modern life. London: Granta.
HAWKES, J. 1967. God in the machine. Antiquity 41: 174–80.
HOYLE, F. 1966. Speculations on Stonehenge. Antiquity 40: 262–76.
JAMES, N. 2009. The Acropolis and its new museum. Antiquity 83: 1144–51.
KENNET, W. & E. YOUNG. 2000. ‘The Stonehenge we don’t deserve’—continued. Antiquity 74: 949–51.
MALONE, C. & S. STODDART. 1998. Editorial. Antiquity 72: 729–38.
NEWALL, R.S. 1929. Stonehenge. Antiquity 3: 75–88.
PARKER PEARSON, M., R. CLEAL, P. MARSHALL, S.
NEEDHAM, J. POLLARD, C. RICHARDS, C. RUGGLES, A. SHERIDAN, J. THOMAS, C. TILLEY, K. WELHAM,
A. CHAMBERLAIN, C. CHENERY, J. EVANS, C. KNUSEL¨	, N. LINFORD, L. MARTIN, J.
MONTGOMERY, A. PAYNE & M. RICHARDS. 2007. The age of Stonehenge. Antiquity 81: 617–39.
PARKER PEARSON, M., A. CHAMBERLAIN, M. JAY, P.
MARSHALL, J. POLLARD, C. RICHARDS, J. THOMAS, C. TILLEY & K. WELHAM. 2009. Who was buried at Stonehenge? Antiquity 83: 23–39.
Parliament. 2011. Written evidence submitted by English Heritage (arts 74). Culture, Media &
Sports Committee: funding of the arts & heritage.
Available at: http://www.publications.parliament. uk/pa/cm201011/cmselect/cmcumeds/464/ 464we05.htm (accessed 11 March 2014).
PIPER, J. 1949. Stonehenge. Architectural Review 106: 177–82.
RICHARDS, J. 2013. Stonehenge. London: English Heritage.
THOMAS, J., P. MARSHALL, M. PARKER PEARSON, J.
POLLARD, C. RICHARDS, C. TILLEY & K. WELHAM. 2009. The date of the Greater Stonehenge Cursus. Antiquity 83: 40–53.
UNESCO. 2008. Stonehenge, Avebury and associated
sites. Available at: http://whc.unesco.org/en/list/373 (accessed 11 March 2014).
WAINWRIGHT, G. 1996. Stonehenge saved? Antiquity 70: 9–12.
– 2000. The Stonehenge we deserve. Antiquity 74: 334–42.

  
Christopher Chippindale et al.
  

  
C Antiquity Publications Ltd.
645
  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  
New era for Stonehenge
  
Christopher Chippindale et al.
  
C Antiquity Publications Ltd.
648
  
C Antiquity Publications Ltd.
645
  
Christopher Chippindale et al.
  
C Antiquity Publications Ltd.
645
  
