Non-destructive provenancing of bluestone axe-heads in Britain
Olwen Williams-Thorpe1, P.J. Potts1 & M.C. Jones2
The authors present a new procedure for discovering where stone artefacts come from without having to cut a slice through them. The method is tested on axes of spotted dolerite bluestone from Preseli in Wales, source of monoliths at Stonehenge.
Keywords: stone axe-heads, provenancing, magnetic susceptibility, X-ray fluorescence
See http://antiquity.ac.uk/ProjGall/williamsthorpe/ henceforward ‘web’ for the tables containing the data which supports this paper.
Introduction to non-destructive characterisation of axes
Scientific provenancing of stone axe-heads has become one of the key elements in assessing trade and contact in prehistoric Britain (e.g. Bradley & Edmonds 1993). However, stone axe studies using the traditional method of petrographic thin sectioning (mainly work by the British Implement Petrology Committee; e.g. Clough & Cummins 1988) have suffered both from the necessity of removing a slice or core from the implements, and also from a growing recognition that petrography alone does not always provide an unambiguous answer to questions of provenance (e.g. Fell & Davis 1988; Williams-Thorpe et al. 2003).
  In order to address these problems, we have adapted and characterised at the Open University several methods of non-destructive analysis for archaeological stone artefacts. The two techniques that are most appropriate for stone axe studies are geochemical analysis using portable X-ray fluorescence (PXRF; Williams-Thorpe et al. 1999); and magnetic susceptibility measurements using a hand-held kappameter (Williams-Thorpe et al. 2003). The required equipment is readily portable and therefore analyses can be made in situ at museums or in the field. The facility with which the measurements can be made and, above all, the entirely non-destructive nature of the work, has resulted in a considerable increase in the number of artefacts that are made available to us for study (we estimate an increase of typically around ten-fold over our previous studies that relied on destructive sampling of artefacts). The geochemical and geophysical data that are obtained can be compared with analogous data on potential outcrop sources, and considered in combination with petrographic information derived from hand specimens, and from existing thin sections where these are available.
  An important factor in our interpretation of magnetic susceptibility and PXRF data is the use of a number of statistical techniques to support the comparison of artefact and source data. In particular, an atypicality index has been developed to quantify the plausibility of an
1 Department of Earth Sciences, The Open University, Milton Keynes MK7 6AA, UK
2 Department of Statistics, The Open University, Milton Keynes MK7 6AA, UK
Received: 4 February 2003; Accepted: 9 September 2003
artefact originating at a particular source (Jones & Williams-Thorpe 2001). This index is especially useful for our application, because it allows robust comparison of data that have different analytical and sampling uncertainties (PXRF data may have larger uncertainties than the source data with which they are compared). While statistics cannot always provide unambiguous answers to questions of provenance, its use in this context introduces an important element of objectivity in assessing, and comparing, artefact outcrop sources.
  Notwithstanding the usefulness of these non-destructive methods, it is important to recognise that there are limitations in their application. The surface characteristics of unprepared rock or artefact surfaces – variations in relief and mineralogy, and weathering layers – are of especial importance in PXRF, where most of the analytical signal originates within the 1-2mm or so of material that is nearest to the analyser (magnetic susceptibility is rather less affected by such factors, because the method assesses a greater depth of material, around 20mm).
  The presence of weathering layers may cause particular problems, because weathering processes can alter the mineralogical and chemical composition of rocks from the original (bulk rock) composition that is frequently required for provenancing purposes. We are currently investigating ways of quantifying, and compensating for, the analytical effects of weathering in certain rock types (Bernardini et al. in prep.).
  The vexed question of whether petrographic or non-destructive (chemical and magnetic) characterisation is more ‘successful’ for British stone axe provenancing has no easy answer. Both methods rely heavily on the availability of a comparative database for potential sources, so a comparison of robustness of technique is only meaningful for cases where such a database exists for both petrography, and for chemical and magnetic characteristics. Williams-Thorpe (in press, in Potts & West) commented on the degree of concordance between the two approaches, and she broadly supported the view of Davis (1985) that the robustness of petrographic assignments depends on the mineralogical distinctiveness of the rock type considered. Yet that view appears to apply more truly to the numerically larger, and therefore more commonly encountered, axe groupings: English Lake District axes (Implement Petrology Committee (IPC) Group VI) and Whin Sill implements (Group XVIII), for example. As we show below, the supposedly petrographically distinctive, but numerically much smaller, spotted dolerite bluestone grouping (Group XIII) displays a startling lack of agreement between the existing petrographic assignments and the new provenance information provided in this paper.
  The IPC petrographic database on stone axes, produced over a period of more than fifty years by researchers, both professional and dedicated amateur, remains an invaluable resource to anyone working in the field. However, the conclusions incorporate the particular range of experience and knowledge of individuals, as well as the changing comparative petrographic databases available to them. The numerical data that we use, on the other hand, are reproducible, and therefore more easily scrutinised by other workers. And in the final analysis, petrographic provenancing using thin sections still involves destructive sampling of irreplaceable artefacts. Our non-destructive techniques do not.
  Much of our work so far using PXRF and magnetic susceptibility has concentrated on stone axes. However, the methods have wide applicability to other lithic artefacts, and we have successfully employed magnetic susceptibility and PXRF for the characterisation, respectively, of granite, and of porphyry artefacts and quarry material (Williams-Thorpe & Thorpe 1993; Williams-Thorpe et al. 2001). Using the methods in tandem (Williams-Thorpe et al. 2003) or in combination with other non-destructive techniques (Williams-Thorpe et al. 2000a), can further enhance their effectiveness in provenancing applications. And beyond lithic studies lie further possibilities of employing PXRF, in particular, for the characterisation of other classes of artefact including ceramics, glasses and metals.

Figure 1.  Map showing the find locations of reported Group XIII implements (as listed by Clough & Cummins 1988), and of five other archaeological pieces studied for this work (Car30, Car31, Car34, SilF and Wi389). The list of axes examined is given in Table 1 (http://antiquity.ac.uk/ProjGall/williamsthorpe).
Bluestone axes
We now apply our methods to the investigation of sources of British spotted dolerite ‘bluestone’ (IPC Group XIII) axes and related artefacts (‘related artefacts’ means axe-hammers, battleaxes, maces and adzes; the term ‘axe’ is commonly used rather loosely to refer to all these types, though ‘implement’ is, strictly, a more correct term).
  Polished stone axes manufactured from the spotted dolerite which crops out in the Preseli Mountains of south Wales are of special interest in studies of British prehistoric implements, because this rock was also used for many of the bluestone monoliths of Stonehenge. The distribution of spotted dolerite artefacts in Britain has long been used as supporting evidence for the human transport hypothesis of the Stonehenge bluestones (Atkinson 1979; Green 1997), yet this element in the Stonehenge controversy has never been examined or tested.
  The petrological identifications of many spotted dolerite axes were made during the first half of the twentieth century (e.g. Stone & Wallis 1951) without the benefit of more recent developments in provenancing techniques. Now that the ability of geochemical methods to provide more specific data for source attributions has been demonstrated (e.g. Mandal 1997), and those data can be derived non-destructively (e.g. Williams-Thorpe et al. 1999), it is appropriate to re-examine all of the thirty or so reported spotted dolerite implements.
  In this way we shall re-assess the distribution from source of this axe group using modern methods, and also test whether the original classification of these axes is sufficiently robust to support the Stonehenge human transport hypothesis.
Archaeological background of spotted dolerite axe Group XIII, and the implements studied
Group XIII was defined by archaeologists, in consultation with petrologists, in 1951 (Stone & Wallis 1951) to provide a framework for some dozen implements including axes, an axehammer, and a mace that had all been identified as ‘preselite’, a term adopted to mean the spotted facies of the Preseli dolerite intrusions. These, and subsequent, identifications were made mainly on the basis of mineralogical features observed in petrological thin sections (thus requiring a small sample to be sawn, or drilled, out of the implements), though occasional identifications were made on the basis of hand specimen examination only (cf. Clough & Cummins 1988: 157).
  Preseli spotted dolerite has an unusual appearance in hand specimen, characterised by whitish or pinkish metamorphic spots often up to 10 mm or so in diameter. In view of this, it might be thought surprising that there are, within the published petrological reports of the IPC, a number of revisions to the assignments of artefacts to Group XIII. For example, an axe found in Crawley, Sussex (Sussex 6, IPC serial number 156) appears as ‘ophitic dolerite’ in 1951 (Stone & Wallis 1951: 142) and ‘dolerite’ in 1962 (Evens et al. 1962: 245), but by 1988 has been assigned to ‘Group XIII’ (Clough & Cummins 1988: 165). At least six further instances of uncertain, or subsequently altered, published attributions to Group XIII may be found, suggesting that ‘preselite’ is not always unmistakably distinctive in hand specimen and/or in thin section. It is, indeed, the case that the supposedly diagnostic ‘spots’ may be rather difficult to see on a slightly weathered artefact surface, or may be confused with white crystals of different minerals. The Preseli metamorphic spots are also often much less obvious in thin section than in hand specimen (the spots are distinguished in microscope view only as finer-grained areas comprising altered plagioclase feldspar and quartz inter-growth; Bevins et al. 1989 and cf. Thorpe et al. 1991: 127).
  Some of the difficulty in Group XIII assignments may, perhaps, be due to the introduction in 1972 of ‘Group XXIIIb’, to include artefacts of non-spotted dolerite whose source was also suggested to be in Preseli (Shotton 1972). Group XIII is now deemed to be ‘within the petrographic and geographic range’ of the (broader) Group XXIII (Clough & Cummins 1988: 8-9). The fact that the characteristic metamorphic spots can, in some outcrops, be so dispersed as to make possible the manufacture of an axe in which the spots are ‘missed’, underlines the difficulties faced by IPC workers. It also strengthens the case for using geochemical and other modern characterisation methods, which may provide provenance interpretations which are less dependent on rock appearance and ‘spottedness’.
  The effectiveness of geochemical characterisation for Group XIII has already been demonstrated, since six reported Group XIII implements were analysed in previous studies by Williams-Thorpe et al. (1999) and Jones and Williams-Thorpe (2001). The fact that four out of these six implements appeared not to be of Preseli spotted dolerite has, in large measure, prompted the present study.
  Cooney and Mandal (1995), working within the Irish Stone Axe Project, have suggested on geochemical grounds that three further axes found on Lambay Island, near Dublin, may have originated in Preseli (Cooney & Mandal op.cit.: 973, 978-9). An Irish link had earlier been suggested by Alexander Keiller, who in 1936 identified two axes found in County Antrim as ‘Presely rock’. However, these two axes were demoted to the rather less specific types of ‘dolerite’ and ‘greenstone’, respectively, by Evens et al. (1962: 243).
  Figure 1 shows the position of the Preseli area, and the find locations of the twenty-eight axes and other artefacts assigned to ‘Group XIII’ and ‘Group XIII?’ by Clough and Cummins (1988). We have now examined, and analysed, a total of twenty-four of these artefacts. The remaining four are artefacts which we were unable to locate, being either in private collections, lost, or stolen.
  Although the core part of our project was to study those artefacts listed as Group XIII or XIII? in Clough and Cummins (op. cit.), we also report here results for four additional artefacts which had been linked to Group XIII in earlier IPC record cards or publications (Car30, 31, 34 and Wi389), and an unworked flake that appeared in hand specimen to be spotted dolerite (SilF). The find locations of these five pieces are also shown on Figure 1.
  The studied artefacts include unperforated axes as well as shaft-hole implements (axehammers, battle-axes, maces; implement types are noted on Figure 1). Archaeological contexts are rarely recorded, the most secure being the Beaker and Bronze Age associations of Wiltshire 302 (Wilsford) and Radnorshire 4 (Clap yr Arian), respectively (Evens et al. 1962: 219; Grimes 1935:278). The ten unperforated axes, or fragments thereof, suggest the inclusion within Group XIII of earlier material, since such implements are generally assumed to be Neolithic in age.
  Figure 2 shows Radnorshire 4, the battle-axe from Clap yr Arian. The whitish metamorphic spots are particularly clear on the left-hand side Figure 3 illustrates the manner of PXRF measurement.
  
Characterisation of the implements
Measurement procedures
The only preparation carried out prior to analysis was gentle wiping of the implements with de-ionised water, in order to remove surface dirt and dust.
  Magnetic susceptibility measurements require the stone axe or other artefact to be held gently against the active end of the instrument (a KT-5 kappameter from Exploranium G. S. Ltd.) for about two seconds. A small magnetic field is applied to the measured object, from which the instrument computes and displays the magnetic susceptibility, that is the induced magnetism, of the rock. Several measurements (typically between five and ten) are made on each implement, depending on its size and shape. The minimum sample size for effective measurement is c. 50mm across and 20mm thick, and the maximum surface relief or curvature must be less than 10mm. Simple arithmetic corrections are routinely applied to magnetic susceptibility readings, in order to

Figure 2.  Photograph of the spotted dolerite battle-axe Radnorshire 4 from Clap yr Arian.

Figure 3.  The measurement procedure using the PXRF equipment. Photos from the authors, reproduced by permission of Radnorshire Museum (Amgueddfa Sir Faesyfed).
  
compensate for non-standard sample size, and for irregular surfaces. The recommended procedures for measurement and data correction of lithics are described in a series of papers from the Open University, and procedures especially relevant to axes and similar artefacts are in Williams-Thorpe et al. (2000b; 2003 and references therein), and Markham (2000).
  PXRF measurements were carried out in the manner illustrated above in Figure 3, by placing the implements in turn on the PXRF probe. In this method, a surface area of 25mm diameter is exposed to X-rays from three radioisotope sources which are rotated in front of the sample in sequence within the PXRF instrument. Fluorescent X-rays are detected by a solid state (HgI2) detector. Element concentrations are computed by the instrument and displayed immediately after measurement. Counting times for our work on spotted dolerites were 340 s per measurement, and at least five measurements were made on most of the implements. Quantitative data were obtained for five major and minor elements, and a range of trace elements (Table 1, web). Recommended procedures, including simple safety precautions, for lithic analysis are given in Williams-Thorpe et al. (1999) and WilliamsThorpe in press, in Potts & West), while instrumental and analytical considerations are in Potts et al. (1995; 1997a; 1997b). Like the magnetic susceptibility data, PXRF analytical results require routine arithmetic corrections, to apply instrumental calibration factors and to compensate for uneven sample surface relief. The derivation and application of these corrections are detailed in the series of papers by Potts et al. referred to, but are also summarised, together with the measurement procedures, by Williams-Thorpe (in press op. cit.).
  The weathering depths on the axes and other implements studied (cf. discussion above) were observed to be variable, but mainly much less than 1 mm (weathered depths could be assessed to some extent in hand specimen, and were confirmed for several Group XIII axes by examination of the existing thin sections, which are most often taken from axe surfaces). Since each PXRF measurement assesses a surface area of only about 25mm in diameter, we were able to select the freshest-looking implement surfaces for analysis, using any recently abraded or broken areas to aid in our assessment of weathering.
Results
The chemical analyses for the objects analysed for this paper (n=23) together with their magnetic susceptibilities are given in Table 1, web. Chemical analyses for a further six Group XIII artefacts were reported by Jones and Williams-Thorpe (2001), but since that paper did not give magnetic susceptibility, these magnetic data are now presented in Table 1.
Characterisation of the Preseli source area
In order to assess the provenance of reported Group XIII implements, analogous data on the source area in Preseli are required. Chemical data from a wide range of spotted dolerite outcrops are already available in the published geological literature (summarised in Jones & Williams-Thorpe 2001; see references therein for original data sources). However, we found no existing magnetic susceptibility data for Preseli. As part of the present project, therefore, a new susceptibility survey of the outcrops was carried out. Fourteen outcrops (twelve named on O.S. maps and two small, unnamed outcrops) were measured, giving a total of 861 readings. The measurements were taken roughly on topographic grids established at outcrops by pacing, and using as guides aerial photographs at a scale of 1:5000 (Millenium Maps™ from Getmapping™). This ensured as comprehensive coverage of outcrops as was possible, bearing in mind that some parts are precipitous and not accessible.
The magnetic susceptibility measurements are shown in Figure 4.
  The susceptibility of the rocks is generally fairly low, mainly in the range 0.40 – 0.90 x 10-3 SI, with a peak at around 0.50 x 10-3 SI and a small number of readings between 1-2 x 10-3 SI. However, we recorded a small number of readings
(n=8), in a restricted part of the eastern end of the Preseli outcrops, which were anomalously high – up to 103 x 10-3 SI. These were noted within two small areas of rock (each a few metres across), and possibly represent mineralised parts of the outcrops (a geochemical drainage survey of Preseli suggested the
  

Figure 4.  Histogram showing magnetic susceptibility of Preseli spotted dolerite outcrops (n=853).
  
presence of some base metal mineralisation in this region; Cameron 1988). We cannot be sure whether other such anomalous areas of rock might exist elsewhere in Preseli, but we found none within the other 853 measurements. It seems reasonable, particularly as mineralised rocks are unlikely candidates for implement manufacture, to regard the distribution of readings shown on Figure 4 as representative of (un-mineralised) Preseli spotted dolerite.
Comparison of implements with the Preseli source area
To establish the degree of similarity between the artefacts and the Preseli spotted dolerites, we examine, firstly, the magnetic susceptibility information, and, secondly, the chemical data, using in each case statistical atypicality calculations (based on the procedure described by Jones & Williams-Thorpe 2001) to compare artefacts with source. Since the atypicality probabilities underpin much of the interpretation made in this paper, the method of their calculation is given in the Appendix.
Magnetic susceptibility data
Several of the artefacts have high magnetic susceptibilities: Wiltshire 10, for example, from Windmill Hill, has a magnetic susceptibility of over 50 x 10-3 SI, and Pembrokeshire 13 (Nevern), Carmarthen 31 (Laugharne), and Carmarthen 34 (Marchgwyn) have susceptibilities greater than 10 x 10-3 SI. These measurements are, therefore, immediate indications that some artefacts are unlikely to be from Preseli.
  Atypicality probabilities and Mahalanobis-type distances (cf. Jones & Williams-Thorpe op. cit.) for twenty-nine archaeological artefacts, compared with 853 Preseli measurements, are given in Table 2 (web).
  The lower the atypicality probability, the less typical the artefact is of the source (cf. Jones & Williams-Thorpe 2001: 11). Atypicalities in Table 2 of > 0.1 give no reason to doubt that the source is Preseli, but atypicalities < 0.01 indicate that a Preseli source is unlikely. An atypicality of between 0.1 and 0.01 is more difficult to interpret – based on statistical criteria, such measurements are expected to occur very occasionally within the source; in these cases, other evidence (chemistry, petrography) may help to clarify the source.
  The four artefacts which have the highest magnetic susceptibilities, together with Dumfries 8 (Watcarrick), have probabilities of much less than 0.01, and, therefore, are very unlikely to belong to the Preseli distribution. Carmarthen 30 (Garn Wen, magnetic susceptibility 1.01 x 10-3 SI) has an atypicality probability of 0.09. For the remaining artefacts, the magnetic susceptibility data are consistent with possible origin within Preseli, though at varying distances from the centre of the source distribution (cf. Table 2, column 2, the Mahalanobis-type distances).
Chemical data
The PXRF chemical analyses of the artefacts (Table 1) were compared with the Preseli database of forty-five rocks previously used by Jones and Williams-Thorpe (2001: 4-5).
  In the first instance, it is useful to examine bi-variate graphs using key discriminants plotted relative to Zr, an element which is generally immobile in rocks and which is frequently used to illustrate geochemical discrimination (cf. e.g. Rollinson 1993). Figures 5 and 6 include data for all the archaeological pieces analysed for this work, and also for those six previously analysed (Williams-Thorpe et al. 1999; Jones & Williams-Thorpe 2001).
  Thus, from Figures 5 and 6, it is apparent that several of the artefacts lie outside the analytical field of Preseli rocks. Artefacts with concentrations of Zr that are higher than those of Preseli (in which Zr reaches a maximum value of ca. 100 ppm) are of particularly doubtful Preseli origin. These include Pembrokeshire 13, Carmarthenshire 31, Wiltshire 10, Carmarthenshire 34, Essex 23 and Suffolk 94. Examination of the other elements plotted in Figure 5 (Nb, Y, Ba and Sr) shows further outlying and marginal samples, including Anglesey 10, Merioneth 8, Dumfriesshire 8, Cheshire 11, Shropshire axe-hammer 61, Carmarthenshire 30, Sussex 6, Sussex 178 and Cardiganshire 25.
  The elements plotted in Figure 5 include those likely to be most representative of whole rock composition in PXRF of dolerite artefacts (cf. Williams-Thorpe et al. 1999: 224). Y was shown by Williams-Thorpe et al. (op. cit.) to be subject to only minor depletion in slightly weathered artefact surfaces, but this depletion might, nevertheless, help to explain the apparent offset between Preseli rocks and artefacts (Figure 5(b)) which, in other graphs of Figure 5 and 6, are within Preseli limits. Nb concentrations in many of the artefacts are around detection limits (6 ppm; Potts et al. 1995), but the graph (Figure 5(a)) usefully serves to demonstrate chemical differences between some higher Nb artefacts, and Preseli.
  
  An atypicality index was used to compare the chemistry of the artefacts with that of Preseli. While still following in general the procedure described in Jones and Williams-Thorpe (2001), we have now extended the exercise to include a larger number of elements in addition to the four (Zr, Nb, Y, Sr) which, for a variety of analytical and geochemical reasons, were identified by Jones and Williams-Thorpe (op. cit.) as most useful for their case. Thus, in Table 3, atypicality probabilities for each artefact in relation to Preseli are given for four, six, and seven elements in turn. The atypicalities should be interpreted in the same way as for the magnetic susceptibility data, that is, a very low atypicality probability casts doubt on a Preseli source.
  Suffolk 94, Wiltshire 10, Carmarthenshire 30, 31 and 34, are immediately identifiable as extremely unlikely to belong to the Preseli distribution (Table 3, column 2), with atypicalities near zero (0.0005 or < 0.0005). The inclusion of Fe and Rb in the atypicality calculations (Table 3, column 3) adds Cardiganshire 25, Cheshire 11, Dumfries 8, Surrey 34 and Sussex 178 to the list of very unlikely Preseli artefacts (again, with atypicality probabilities of 0.0005 or < 0.0005). And when Ba is also included (Table 3, column 4), Shropshire axe-hammer 61 is also far from the Preseli distribution.


Figure 5 a&b.  Graphs showing axes and other archaeological pieces studied (PXRF data; error bars are typical sd of the mean), together with rocks of the Preseli spotted dolerite area (data from the literature, see text). Named samples are discussed in the text. County abbreviations are given in Table 1.
Sussex 6 and SilF are doubtful Preseli members, with lowest atypicalities of 0.0073 and 0.0018 respectively. The result for SilF is curious, because this piece (an unworked flake from Silbury Hill) appears very similar in chemistry to Wiltshire 108 and 109 (cf. Table 1), which are ‘allowed’ by atypicality as Preseli. The low (depleted, or perhaps poorly determined because of sampling uncertainty) Y concentration in SilF (12 ppm; n=2), together with the negative Rb (- 4 ppm) may be having an undue effect on the atypicality probability in this case. The remaining artefacts analysed for this work – Car23, Dev1, Do41, Ha41, Ra4, and Wi 108, 109, 118, 302 and 389 – all have compositions consistent with an origin within the Preseli dolerites. Results for the six artefacts previously analysed (and presented here with atypicalities for a larger number of chemical elements) are mainly in line with our previous conclusions: Essex 23 and
Pembrokeshire 13 are unlikely to be from Preseli; Anglesey 10 and Essex 29 have chemistry that could originate in Preseli; while Merioneth 8 differs from from Preseli mainly in its anomalously high Sr concentration, but is very difficult to interpret because of its single PXRF measurement. Only for Monmouthshire 8 do our new atypicalities make a qualitative difference; this implement now appears less typical of Preseli.
  
Figure 6 a&b.  Graphs showing axes and other archaeological pieces studied (PXRF data; error bars are typical sd of the mean), together with rocks of the Preseli spotted dolerite area (data from the literature, see text). Named samples are discussed in the text. County abbreviations are given in Table 1.
Table 3.  Atypicality probabilities for elemental data for axes and other archaeological pieces relating to Group XIII, in comparison with outcrops of the Preseli spotted dolerite area
IPC/Other referenceUsing Zr Y SrUsing Zr Y Sr Nb RbUsing Zr Y Sr Nband Nband FeRb Fe and BaAnalysed for this paper
Ca250.01560.00010.000Car230.18900.38130.5013Ch110.03430.00050.0010Dev10.16490.09390.1139Do410.36700.30520.1284Dmf80.06630.00000.0001Ha410.15840.30560.4170Ra40.67040.18420.1771Shah610.03510.00240.0000S940.00000.00000.0000Su340.44880.00010.0003Sx60.40490.03750.0073Sx1780.00160.00000.0000Wi 100.00000.00000.0000Wi1080.22560.27780.2326Wi1090.35410.16160.1463Wi1180.28870.48880.3609Wi13020.73550.80890.7134Car300.00050.00000.0000Car310.00000.00000.0000Car340.00000.00000.0000Wi3890.09010.17380.2609SilF0.00820.00180.0039Analysed by Jones and Williams-Tho
An10*rpe (2001)
0.03850.03700.0547E230.08310.00030.0007E290.40950.11460.1462M80.00530.00450.0065Me8* **0.00000.00020.0005P130.00000.00000.0000Notes: county abbreviations as in Table 1; * based on one PXRF measurement per axe; ** ignoring anomalously high Sr, atypicalities are 0.0117, 0.0219 and 0.0311 respectively (for 3, 5 and 6 elements); standard errors used in atypicality calculations are derived from repeat axe measurements (cf. Table 1) – this accounts for small differences between the atypicalities given here for axes previously studied by Jones and Williams-Thorpe (2001), and data in Jones and Williams-Thorpe (op cit.) table 5; Fe values used are as oxides (total iron as Fe2O3).
Summary of the new evidence for Group XIII membership and its relationship to the existing petrographic evidence
In Table 4, we summarise our new information on the twenty-eight objects listed as Group XIII by Clough and Cummins (1988). We comment on the evidence for membership of Group XIII – Preseli spotted dolerite – and also of Group XXIIIb – the broader dolerite IPC grouping that includes unspotted Preseli dolerites.
  Eight objects conform very well to Preseli petrology, and are confirmed by our studies as Group XIII spotted dolerites. Me8, more marginal in chemistry, may also be retained in the Group. In addition, two objects, An10 and in particular Wi302, are candidates for Group XXIIIb. E29 and Sx6 are less likely members of Group XXIIIb in terms of their magnetic susceptibility and chemistry respectively, but we cannot discount the possibility. All the other reported Group XIII objects that we examined differ significantly from Preseli, and may, therefore, need re-assessment in terms of axe group classification.
  Table 4 also reports the results for the additional five objects that we studied (that is, pieces not listed as Group XIII by Clough & Cummins op. cit.). Wi389 is Preseli spotted dolerite, and the balance of evidence may be in favour of a Preseli origin for SilF.
  Two artefacts listed in Table 4 present particular problems in interpretation. M8, spotted and with magnetic susceptibility firmly within Preseli, was allowed by Jones and Williams-Thorpe (2001) as Preseli in origin though with rather marginal chemical composition. However, it is excluded from Preseli using the more rigorous error assessment adopted for the present work. Shorter PXRF counting times (and, therefore, larger uncertainties) of the early measurements of which M8 formed a part may contribute to the apparent ambiguity of these data.
  Sx178 is more difficult to account for. It also appears spotted, and has Preseli type magnetic susceptibility, but a chemical composition atypical of Preseli. The PXRF analysis is based on ten measurements at the longer count times that we now adopt, on surfaces that appear reasonably smooth and planar, and not heavily weathered. Unusually low X-ray backscatter peaks (cf. Potts et al.. 1997a) observed for this piece are likely to reflect the relatively high Fe concentration (nearly 14 per cent Fe2O3; Table 1). The data from this artefact could, therefore, suggest an outcrop of spotted dolerite with a composition that is not represented among our Preseli source material.
  The petrographic evidence was reviewed from IPC record cards, and from our re-examination of twenty existing Group XIII thin sections. Several of those implements which differ from Preseli magnetically or chemically also have some differentiating features in thin section. But these are mainly slight, such as some finer-grained texture than is typical of Preseli in Sussex 6. And, since the Preseli dolerites encompass a range of textures and mineralogy (cf. Bevins et al. 1989), it is sometimes only in the light of additional new data that provenance can be confirmed. Dumfries 8, on the other hand, (listed only ‘Group XIII?’ in Clough & Cummins 1988) is rather more exceptional in petrography, being an altered (uralitic) doleritic rock.
  It seems likely that the presence of an ophitic or sub-ophitic doleritic petrography may have sometimes been taken as a determining characteristic in assigning implements to Group XIII. The presence or absence of the diagnostic spots cannot always be assessed by thin section examination alone, since the spots are sometimes so dispersed in the rock that, as H. H. Thomas noted, ‘ … there is every possibility of their being unrepresented in a micro-section’ (Thomas 1923: 243).
  Ixer (1994; cf. Ixer et al. in press) has made the case for use of opaque mineralogy studies in lithic provenancing, and the potential of this method for Group XIII axes is enhanced by preliminary studies that suggested it might be possible to differentiate Preseli outcrops on the basis of their opaque mineral assemblages (Ixer in Thorpe et al. 1991; Ixer 1997). Following up this approach is hampered at present by the severe limitations in using the existing axe thin sections (designed for transmitted light petrography) for opaque mineralogy, and also by the need for more detailed source sampling in order to take account of the sensitivity of the method to minor lithological variations.
Table 4.  Summary of new information on Group XIII membership
Is the objectCould the objectPreseli spottedbe Preseli non-IPC/Other	dolerite?spotted dolerite?Otherreference	Object type	Find site*	i.e. Group XIIIi.e. Group XXIIIbcommentsObjects assigned to Group XIII in Clough and Cummins (1988)
An10	axe-hammer	LLANFAETHLU	NOpossiblyunspotted**Ca25axe-hammerPENLANNOnounspottedCar23battle-axeTRELECH A’R BETTWSYESn/aspottedCh11axeBARROWNOnounspottedDev1maceHigh Peak, SIDMOUTHYESn/aspottedDo41small axe, reworkedMAIDEN CASTLEYESn/aspottedDmf8axeBlackburn Bridge,
WATCARRICKNOnounspottedE23axeNear LAMARSH HallNOnounspottedE29axe-hammerTHAXTEDNOpossiblypossible though rather marginal Group XXIIIb
(chemistry lowest atyp. 0.11; mag
sus atyp. 0.18); unspottedHa41axeBankes Heath,
BOURNEMOUTHYESn/aspottedHa47axeWORTHY DOWN,
Worthynot examinedM8small axeSt Brides, NETHERWENT	??chemically at edges of Preseli distribution (Fig. 3, Table 3); spottedMe8axe-hammerNear ARTHOG,	Group XIII?n/achemistryLlangelynnin,marginal Preseli;Bwlch Gwyn FarmspottedP13maceCilgwyn Mawr, NEVERN	NOnounspottedP40axe-hammer or battle-axeLLANFYRNACH	not examinedRa4battle-axeCLAP YR ARIAN,	YES
Llansantffraed-Cwmdeuddwrn/aspottedShah61axe-hammerChirbury, WOTHERTON	NOnounspottedS94axeLAKENHEATHNOnounspottedSu34axeHERSHAMNOnodistinction from Preseli rests on Fe Rb Ba; unspottedSx6axeCRAWLEYNOpossiblychemistry marginal Preseli; unspottedSx35battle-axeTWINEHAMnot examinedSx178shaft-hole adzeNEWHAVEN??chemistry isor mace-headatypical of Preseli; spottedWi10miscellaneous fragmentWINDMILL HILLNOnounspottedWi108miscellaneousSTONEHENGE,YESn/aspottedartefact fragmentSouth Barrow, context unknownTable 4.  Summary of new information on Group XIII membership (continued)
Is the objectCould the objectPreseli spottedbe Preseli non-IPC/Otherdolerite?spotted dolerite?OtherreferenceObject typeFind site*	i.e. Group XIIIi.e. Group XXIIIbcommentsWi109miscellaneousSTONEHENGE,	YESn/aspottedartefact fragmentAubrey Hole 24, topsoil/turfWi118axeSTOCKTON Earthworks	YESn/aspottedWi133axe-hammerEbbesbourne Wake,
FIFIELD (Fyfield) Downnot examinedWi302
Other objects battle-axe
with petrographic or otWILSFORD S. Barrow 54
her similarities to Group XIIINOyesChemistry and mag sus typical of Preseli; unspottedCar30large axeGARN WEN Farm,
Llanglydwen, CilmaenllwydNOnounspottedCar31small axeThe Pill, LAUGHARNENOnounspottedCar34axe-hammerMARCHGWYN,
CilmaenllwydNOnounspottedWi389probablyAVEBURY AREA, notYESn/aspottedunworked piecefar from West Kennet long barrowSilF***unworked flakeVery probably from	Group XIII?n/avery low Y andSTONEHENGERb affects PXRF (n=2) atypicalities; spottedNotes: An10, E23, M8, Me8 and P13 discussed by Jones and Williams-Thorpe (2001); * shortened name, as used in text and tables, is in upper case; ** ‘unspotted’ or ‘spotted’ refers throughout to the metamorphic spots characteristic of Preseli; *** SilF is part of a collection made by R. Faulkner in c. 1849 of material from various Wiltshire sites including Stonehenge and Silbury Hill; investigation by R. Cleal (pers. comm.) has indicated that the piece is almost certainly from Stonehenge, not, as was thought at the time of analysis and naming of the sample, from Silbury Hill.
Discussion and conclusions
Comments on techniques
The non-destructive PXRF technique has been successful in producing data of analytical quality (accuracy and precision) appropriate for comparison with the published source analytical database (which has been produced using well-established laboratory XRF techniques on crushed rock samples). The magnetic susceptibility, a relatively recent addition to our work on stone axes, has also provided some extremely useful information, especially in helping to identify some of the most clearly anomalous (in terms of Group XIII membership) implements. Interpreted using atypicality calculations, the new data provide indications that alter some previous (petrographic) assignments.
  In the case of Group XIII, the chemical and magnetic data have identified a larger variety of petrological types and, therefore, outcrop sources, within the studied assemblage than was previously apparent from the petrographic work alone. The petrographic descriptions are very rarely in actual contradiction to our new work; rather, the features observable in some thin sections are insufficiently diagnostic to exclude non-Preseli dolerites.
Comments on archaeological implications
Figure 7 illustrates the new information on the distribution of Preseli spotted and unspotted dolerite implements in the UK.
  The number of spotted dolerite implements confirmed in this work as originating from Preseli is fewer than half of that previously reported as Group XIII. It is notable that many of the implements that we would now exclude (from Group XIII) are those at the edges of the geographic distribution of artefacts, namely those found in East Anglia, the Welsh borders and Scotland. The revised distribution is much reduced, being limited to Wales and part of

Figure 7.  Map showing the new information on the distribution of Preseli spotted and unspotted dolerite implements (all the objects shown were previously assigned to Group XIII). A question mark indicates uncertainty in our provenance conclusion (cf. Table 4).
southern England. Future analysis of the many dolerite axes that have been examined in thin section, but which proved to have insufficiently diagnostic mineralogical features for assignment to a specific implement Group (cf. Clough & Cummins 1988, passim) may, of course, add to the list of Preseli products. Such analysis is probably more likely to increase numbers of the less distinctive unspotted Preseli products.
  The evidence regarding spotted dolerite axes from Preseli in Ireland is contradictory. Three axes identified by Cooney and Mandal as probably originating in south-west Wales (1995: 979) appear petrographically similar to Group XIII in transmitted light thin sections, yet have differing opaque mineral assemblages (Cooney & Mandal op. cit.: 978). Chemically, they are characterised by high Zr and Y concentrations (137 – 180 ppm, and 34 – 47 ppm respectively; data from Mandal 1996: 192), and, so, are unlike the Preseli dolerite intrusions discussed above. Overall, the evidence for Group XIII axes in Ireland is unconvincing at present.
  The confirmed Preseli dolerite artefacts include battle-axes and a mace, and several unperforated axes (cf. Table 4). The dating evidence remains essentially unchanged from that previously reported in the literature for Group XIII; associations with round barrows and with Beaker finds still apply (Radnorshire 4, and the unspotted Preseli dolerite battleaxe Wiltshire 302). Unperforated axes are regarded as Neolithic (e.g. Bradley & Edmonds 1993; Pitts 1996), though secure associations of spotted dolerite implements with pre-Beaker contexts are lacking.
  Preseli dolerite was used for three highly polished and carefully finished battle-axes (Carmarthenshire 23, Radnor 4, and Wiltshire 302), all very similar in style, and suggestive of a large amount of care and time expended in their manufacture. The first two listed were found in Wales (and have very obvious spots), and the third in England (and there may be another example among the implements that we were not able to examine). These battleaxes are, however, unusual within the Preseli implements. Notwithstanding the surface weathering that can sometimes obscure original polish, most confirmed Group XIII objects are unexceptional in style and appearance (cf. Lynch 1975, 124). It is also notable that the style of the three battle-axes is not exclusive to Preseli rock; similarly shaped implements were made from other dolerites, for example Whin Sill (IPC Group XVIII; cf. WilliamsThorpe et al. 2003).
  Although artefacts of spotted dolerite appear to be less widespread and less numerous than was previously thought, some have been found beyond the generally accepted limits of glaciation in Britain (cf. Figure 7), implying human dispersal. The available data present a picture of a small and morphologically disparate group of implements distributed (perhaps traded) within a limited area mainly within Wessex, possibly both before and during the first use of bluestones at Stonehenge (which was c. 2600-2500 BC: Cleal et al. 1995). Two of the confirmed Group XIII pieces are reported as ‘miscellaneous artefacts’ (neither appears to be an axe) and were found at Stonehenge; they (and also, perhaps, SilF) may be part of the large assemblage of bluestone fragments found in many contexts at and near Stonehenge, rather than part of bluestone axe trade. The identification of an unworked fragment of spotted dolerite bluestone from the vicinity of Avebury/West Kennet long barrow (Wiltshire 389) adds to the occurrences of bluestone apparently associated with a variety of prehistoric monuments in Wiltshire (cf. Thorpe et al. 1991, 108-113).
  Studies of lithic resource procurement strategies in British prehistory are bedevilled by the difficulty of distinguishing between primary sources (material at outcrops), and secondary sources (rock removed from outcrops by, for example, glaciation, and perhaps available locally to the users). The case of spotted dolerite implements is further complicated by the possibility that they could have been made from the same assemblage of rocks or erratics that formed the Stonehenge monoliths, whether these were obtained in Preseli or were available nearer to Salisbury Plain. The working and polishing of the implements has removed any original surface that may have held clues to the type of source rock acquisition.
  Spotted dolerite axes have been regarded as illustrating a special regard for Preseli rock, helping to justify the concept of human selection and transport of spotted dolerite for Stonehenge monoliths. Our new information on Group XIII axes and other implements has reduced the number that can be reliably assigned to this group, and the extent of their geographical distribution. Notwithstanding evidence for other prehistoric, Neolithic, activity in the Preseli area (Darvill & Wainwright 2001), it appears that spotted dolerite was used for a very small proportion of British stone implements, mainly of unremarkable styles.
Overall conclusion
Non-destructive analysis has shown that spotted dolerite was much less widely used for implement manufacture in Britain than has previously been thought, thus weakening the argument that stone axe production and trade constituted a prompting influence for Stonehenge monolith selection and transport.
Appendix: atypicality calculations
Let d be the number of variables measured on source material and artefacts; d = 1 for magnetic susceptibility and d = 4, 6 or 7 for PXRF measurements. Suppose there are n separate measurements on the source material and k such measurements on an artefact. Let x- and S be the vector of sample means and the sample variance-covariance matrix, respectively, of the source measurements (the ith diagonal element of S is the sample variance of the ith variable and the (i, j)th element of S, i ? j is the sample covariance between the ith and jth variables). Let y be the vector of sample means based on artefact measurements. Then, following Jones andWilliams-Thorpe’s (2001) modification of standard atypicality-type calculations (e.g. Krzanowski 1988), the (modified) Mahalanobis distance of the artefact from the source material is
m0 = n n d(( 2? ))(y x S P k? )T( + / )?1(y x? ) d n ?1
  Here, superscripts T and –1 stand for vector transpose and matrix inverse, respectively. We take P to be a diagonal matrix, the non-zero elements of which are the sample variances of the artefact measurements (in so doing, we depart slightly from Jones and Williams-Thorpe (2001), where we used analytical errors provided by the measuring instrument). Finally, to calibrate m0, the atypicality value is defined to be the probability of
P M( 0 ?m0)
getting as or more extreme a value as m0 assuming multivariate normality. The approximate distribution of M0 which we use is the F distribution on d and n – d degrees of freedom.
Acknowledgements
This work forms part of an on-going project at the Open University, in co-operation with the IPC (now Implement Petrology Group or IPG) and others, aimed at refining the distributions of a number of stone axe groups, using non-destructive geochemical and geophysical methods of characterisation. The work on Group XIII axes which is reported in this paper was wholly funded by a grant from the Leverhulme Trust (F/00269/C) which we gratefully acknowledge. The following museums and individuals are thanked for their help in permitting and facilitating analysis of archaeological objects, and for loans of thin sections: Mike Stokes, Shrewsbury Museums Service; Moya O’Mullane, Grosvenor Museum, Chester; Ros Cleal, Alexander Keiller Museum, Avebury; Martin Wright, Salisbury Museum; Paul Robinson, Devizes Museum; John Allan, Exeter Museum; Peter Woodward, Dorchester Museum; Peter Berridge, Colchester Museum; Elizabeth Walker, Richard Bevins, Jana Horak and Heather Jackson, National Museum and Galleries of Wales Cardiff; Siobhan Ratford, Dumfries Museum; David Clark, Tullie House Museum, Carlisle; John Faithfull, Hunterian Museum, Glasgow; Emma O’Connor, Lewes Museum; Michael Rowe, Elmbridge Museum; Gillian Varndell, British Museum; Christopher Chippindale and Sharon Webb, Cambridge University Museum; Michael Freeman, Ceredigion Museum, Aberystwyth; Gavin Evans, Carmarthen Museum; Rachel Scholl, Radnorshire Museum; David Smith, Natural History Museum; Stephen Minnitt, Somerset County Museums Service, Taunton; Rob Ixer, University of Birmingham. Special thanks are due to Bill Pratt, Nur Bahal and Jovanna Scorsone at the Royal Ontario Museum for their help with the loan of Sx 178. For permissions and advice regarding work in Preseli, we are grateful to Sid Howells and the Countryside Council for Wales; and J. E. George of George, Davies and Evans (Solicitors), and Lady Marcher and the Barony of Kemes. Ros Cleal kindly allowed us to report analyses of SilF and also provided very helpful information on the likely find location of this piece. We thank Heather Pegg and Will Adams of Radnorshire Museum for allowing us to use photographs of a battle-axe in their collections (Figure 2). Ian Rigby helped in the examination of petrological thin sections, and the diagrams were produced by John Taylor.
  
References
ATKINSON, R.J.C. 1979. Stonehenge: archaeology and interpretation. Harmondsworth: Penguin (3rd edition).
BERNARDINI, F., P.J. POTTS, M.C. JONES, P.C. WEBB & O. WILLIAMS-THORPE. In preparation. Effect of weathering on in situ measurements of geological samples by portable X-ray fluorescence analysis: dolerite and rhyolite outcrops in the Preseli Mountains, South Wales.
BEVINS, R. E., G. J. LEES, & R. A. ROACH. 1989.
Ordovician intrusions of the Strumble HeadMynydd Preseli region, Wales: lateral extensions of the Fishguard Volcanic Complex, Journal of the Geological Society of London 146: 113-123.
BRADLEY, R. & M. EDMONDS. 1993. Interpreting the axe trade. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
CAMERON, D.G. 1988. A geochemical drainage survey of the Preseli Hills, south-west Dyfed, Wales, Transactions of the Institute of Mining and Metallurgy, Section B: Applied Earth Science 97: B42.
CLEAL, M.J., K.E. WALKER, & R. MONTAGUE. 1995. Stonehenge in its landscape. English Heritage Archaeological Report 10. London: English Heritage.
CLOUGH, T.H.MCK. & W.A. CUMMINS (ed.). 1988.
Stone Axe Studies Volume 2. Council for British Archaeology Research Report No. 67. London: Council for British Archaeology.
COONEY, G. & S. MANDAL. 1995. Getting to the core of the problem: petrological results from the Irish Stone Axe Project, Antiquity 69: 969-980.
DARVILL, T. & G. WAINWRIGHT. SPACES – exploring Neolithic landscapes in the Strumble-Preseli area of southwest Wales, Antiquity 76: 623-624.
DAVIS, R.V. 1985. Implement petrology: the state of the art – some problems and possibilities, in P. Phillips (ed.), The archaeologist and the laboratory. Council for British Archaeology Research report No. 58. London: Council for British Archaeology.
EVENS, E.D., L.V. GRINSELL, S. PIGGOTT & F.S. WALLIS. 1962. Fourth report of the Sub-Committee of the South-Western Group of Museums and Art
Galleries on the Petrological Identification of Stone
Axes, Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society 28: 209266.
FELL, C.I. & R.V. DAVIS. 1988. The petrological identification of stone implements from Cumbria.
In T.H.MCK. Clough & W.A. Cummins 1988: 71-77.
GREEN, C. P. 1997. Stonehenge: geology and prehistory, Proceedings of the Geologists’ Association 108: 1-10.
GRIMES, W.F. 1935. Notes on recent finds of perforated axe-hammers in Wales, Archaeologia Cambrensis 90: 267-278.
IXER, R.A. 1991. Appendix 1. Opaque petrography of Stonehenge bluestone and Carnmenyn dolerites, in R. S. Thorpe et al. 1991: 150-152.
–1994. Does ore petrography have a practical role in the finger-printing of rocks? In N. Ashton & A. David (ed.), Stories in Stone: 10-23. Lithics Studies Society Occasional papers 4, London.
–1997. Detailed provenancing of the Stonehenge dolerites using reflected light petrography, in A. Sinclair, E. Slater & J. Gowlett (ed.), Archaeological Sciences 1995: 11-17. Oxford: Oxbow Monograph 64.
IXER, R.A., O. WILLIAMS-THORPE, R.E. BEVINS & A.D CHAMBERS. In press. A comparison between ‘total petrography’ and geochemistry using a portable XRF as provenancing tools for some Midland axes, in E.A. Walker, F. Wenban-Smith, & F. Healy (ed.), Proceedings of the ‘Lithic Studies in the Year
2000’ Conference. Oxford: Lithic Studies Society, Oxbow Books, Occasional Paper No. 8. (Pre-print available at: http://www.rosiehardman.com/ goodprovenance/onlinepubs.html).
JONES, M. C. & O. WILLIAMS-THORPE. 2001. An
illustration of the use of an atypicality index in provenancing British stone axes, Archaeometry 43: 1-18.
LYNCH, F. 1975. The impact of landscape on prehistoric man, in J.G. Evans, S. Limbrey & H. Cleere (ed.), The effect of man on the landscape: the Highland
Zone: 124 -127. London: Council for British Archaeology Research Report 11.
MANDAL, S. 1996. The Petrology of the Irish Stone Axe, Unpublished Ph.D. Thesis, University of Dublin.
–1997. Striking the balance: the roles of petrography and geochemistry in stone axe studies in Ireland, Archaeometry 39: 289-308.
MARKHAM, M. 2000. Provenance studies of British greenstone implements using non-destructive analytical methods. Unpublished Ph.D. Thesis, Open University, UK.
PITTS, M. 1996. The stone axe in Neolithic Britain,
Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society 62: 311-371.
POTTS, P.J., P.C. WEBB, O.WILLIAMS-THORPE & R. KILWORTH. 1995. Analysis of silicate rocks using field-portable X-ray fluorescence instrumentation incorporating a mercury (II) iodide detector: a preliminary assessment of analytical performance, Analyst 120: 1273-1278.
POTTS, P.J., P.C. WEBB & O. WILLIAMS-THORPE. 1997(a). Investigation of a correction procedure for surface irregularity effects based on scatter peak intensities in the field analysis of geological and archaeological rock samples by portable X-ray fluorescence spectrometry, Journal of Analytical Atomic Spectroscopy 12: 769-776.
–1997(b). The bulk analysis of silicate rocks by portable X-ray fluorescence: effects of sample mineralogy in relation to the size of the excited volume, Geostandards Newsletter 21: 29-41.
ROLLINSON, H. 1993. Using geochemical data. Harlow: Longman Scientific and Technical.
SHOTTON F.W. 1972. The large stone axes ascribed to North-West Pembrokeshire, in F. Lynch & C.
Burgess (ed.), Prehistoric man in Wales and the West: 85-91. Bath: Adamas and Dart.
STONE, J.F.S. & F.S. WALLIS. 1951. Third Report of the Sub-Committee of the South-Western Group of
Museums and Art Galleries on the Petrological
Identification of Stone Axes, Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society 17: 95-158.
THOMAS, H.H. 1923. The sources of the stones of Stonehenge, The Antiquaries Journal 3: 239-260.
THORPE, R. S., O. WILLIAMS-THORPE, D. G. JENKINS &
J. S. WATSON, with contributions by R.A. IXER & R.G. THOMAS. 1991. The geological sources and transport of the bluestones of Stonehenge, Wiltshire, UK, Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society 57: 103-157.
WILLIAMS-THORPE, O. In press. The application of portable X-ray fluorescence analysis to archaeological lithic studies, in P.J. Potts & M. West (ed.), Portable X-ray fluorescence spectrometry: capabilities for in situ analysis. London: Royal Society of Chemistry.
WILLIAMS-THORPE, O. & R.S. THORPE. 1993. Magnetic susceptibility used in non-destructive provenancing of Roman granite columns. Archaeometry 35: 185195.
WILLIAMS-THORPE, O., P.J. POTTS & P.C. WEBB. 1999. Field-portable non-destructive analysis of lithic archaeological samples by X-ray fluorescence instrumentation using a mercury iodide detector: comparison with wavelength-dispersive XRF and a case study in British stone axe provenancing,
Journal of Archaeological Science 26: 215-237.
WILLIAMS-THORPE, O., M.C. JONES, P.J. POTTS &
I. J. RIGBY. (based in part on field observations by
D. Peacock, J. Phillips & N. Bradford). 2001. Geology, mineralogy and characterisation studies of Imperial Porphyry, in V.A. Maxfield & D.P.S. Peacock (ed.), The Roman Imperial Quarries, Survey and Excavation at Mons Porphyrites 1994-1998, Volume 1: Topography and Quarries. Cairo: Egypt Exploration Society: 305-318.
WILLIAMS-THORPE, O., P.C. WEBB & R.S. THORPE. 2000a. Non-destructive portable gamma ray spectrometry used in provenancing Roman granitioid columns from Leptis Magna, North Africa. Archaeometry 42: 77–99.
WILLIAMS-THORPE, O., P.C. WEBB, M.C. JONES &
I.J. RIGBY. 2000b. Magnetic susceptibility thickness corrections for small artefacts and comments on the effects of ‘background’ materials, Archaeometry 42: 101-108.
WILLIAMS-THORPE, O., M.C. JONES & P.C. WEBB. 2003. Non-destructive geochemical and magnetic characterisation of Group XVIII dolerite stone axes and shaft-hole implements from England, Journal of Archaeological Science 30: 1237-1267.
Olwen Williams-Thorpe, P.J. Potts & M.C. Jones
  
Non-destructive provenancing of bluestone axe-heads in Britain
  
360
  
359
  

  
359
  
