The potential of airborne lidar for detection of archaeological features under woodland canopies
B.J. Devereux1, G.S. Amable2, P. Crow3 & A.D. Cliff4
The development of lidar opens a new era in archaeological survey. Working with Forest Research, staff of the Unit for Landscape Modelling here explain the technique, and demonstrate its application to woodland, showing how it can be used to see through the trees. The article by Bewley et al. (pages 636-647 of this volume) shows the technique applied to the Stonehenge landscape.
Keywords: Airborne lidar, archaeological sites, forest canopy, vegetation removal
Introduction
For the last half century vertical and oblique aerial photography has been the mainstay of airborne archaeological reconnaissance. But, despite its immense success it does have certain limitations. In particular, lighting conditions and sun elevation must be at or near optimum levels to detect subtle crop marks. Moreover, where archaeological features are hidden beneath woodland canopies they cannot be seen. This paper highlights the potential of high resolution, digital elevation models derived from airborne laser scanning (lidar) to overcome these problems. It demonstrates that when lidar is used in conjunction with hill-shading techniques that enable variation in the direction and elevation of the illumination source, moreeffectivedetectionoffeaturesispossible.Furthermore,itshowsthatsocalledvegetation removal algorithms have the capacity to reveal features hidden from aerial photography by woodland canopies in considerable detail. The prehistoric hillfort at Welshbury Hill, Gloucestershire, is used as an example. It is concluded that airborne lidar has enormous potential to extend archaeological reconnaissance into new and exciting areas.
Limitations of conventional aerial photography
The detection and mapping of archaeological sites using aerial photography is one of the oldest and most successful branches of remote sensing. Photographs of monuments such as Stonehenge in the United Kingdom date back as far as 1906 and were collected with hand held cameras from army war balloons (see Wilson 2000). With the deployment of vertical cameras in fixed wing aircraft for military reconnaissance in the 1920s it soon became evident that aerial photography had vast potential for archaeological applications. This potential was realised by O.G.S. Crawford, the first Archaeological Officer of the Ordnance Survey, who demonstrated the effectiveness of the technique for mapping earthworks in Wessex (Crawford & Keiller 1928). The rapid growth of aerial survey information and the exciting consequences for archaeological research prompted Crawford to establish the journal Antiquity in 1927 (Wilson 2000).
  The particular feature of aerial photographs which makes them so valuable for aerial reconnaissance is their ability to reveal buried features via crop marks at a scale relevant to the historic landscape. Coupled with its capacity for photographing large areas at a very high spatial resolution it is not surprising that aerial photography has become a central tool for archaeological mapping. Amongst others, the University of Cambridge has conducted ongoing aerial survey programmes since the 1950s aimed at detecting and mapping archaeological sites. The photography resulting from these activities has been central to studies in landscape archaeology (St Joseph 1966). It has resulted in major collections of photography housed within the University of Cambridge (www.uflm.cam.ac.uk) and within government agencies charged with heritage management. The English Heritage National Mapping Programme is heavily reliant on aerial photography from such resources (Bewley 2003).
  The advent of colour photography and photogrammetric techniques has been important in strengthening the capacity of aerial photograph interpretation for revealing archaeological information (Mead 1983, Burnside 1985). Ultimately, however, success depends on the photography containing crop marks which correspond with buried features. Crop marks occur for two main reasons. Firstly, buried features such as ditches cause very slight hollows to occur and equally slight mounds over ramparts, walls and buildings. If photographs are collected when the sun is low in the sky these shallow earthworks cast shadows within the crop which can be detected by the photo-interpreter. Secondly, deeper soils over in-filled ditches and shallower soils over solid features result in variability of moisture regimes and availability. In particular, where the soils are shallow they dry out more quickly and where they are deeper they tend to retain moisture. Areas with a greater depth of soil also have a greater store and availability of nutrients. When arable crops are grown in these soils, the variations in moisture and nutrients cause tonal differences in the crop reflecting stress patterns. These follow the outline of the underlying features.
  Detection of shadows and tonal variation in soils are thus the keystones of air photo interpretation for archaeological reconnaissance. However, it is well known that they are only reliable when photography is collected in ‘ideal’ conditions. This usually means after periods of dry weather when soil moisture differences are most evident and at times when the sun is low in the sky but sufficiently strong to give good illumination. Even when this ideal illumination condition is met there is no guarantee that all features in the scene will be revealed. For example, if the light is shining along a ridge in the micro-topography it will not cast a shadow and the feature might be missed (see Figure 1). As a consequence there are many instances of sites appearing with great clarity on surveys carried out at one date but being almost entirely invisible on surveys conducted at other times.
  A further limitation on the use of aerial photography is the interference of vegetation. Great Britain has approximately 11 per cent woodland cover, with the capacity to hide even

Figure 1. The effect of illumination direction on the visibility of landscape features. The image shows Fenners cricket ground in central Cambridge. Image (a) suggests that the area is flat. However, moving the illumination source through 90 degrees (image (b)) reveals clear evidence of ridge and furrow which can barely be detected on the ground.
major features from the lens of the camera. Even larger woodland areas exist elsewhere in Europeandasaconsequencethearchaeologicalrecordfortheseareascanonlybeconstructed from expensive, laborious and time consuming field survey. As a result, our knowledge of the historic landscape is far stronger in agricultural areas than in woodlands and forests. However, advances in remote sensing techniques and their applications in forestry have led to a realisation of their potential for archaeological prospection and survey (Crow 2003) and so to new research and development of the method. The purpose of this paper is to present initial results of this research.
Airborne lidar survey of archaeological sites
Airborne laser scanning records the topography of the landscape with a scanning laser beam which can map even very small variations in height. When linked with digital image-processing techniques that artificially illuminate the images, laser scanning has the potential to overcome many of the limitations associated with photographic interpretation. Furthermore, with advanced image-processing techniques, it has the capacity to penetrate many types of woodland canopy (Amable et al. 2004; Devereux et al. 2004) and reveal hitherto hidden archaeological features.
  Although the technology is complex, the underlying principle of airborne laser scanning is straightforward. Short pulses of laser energy are fired from an aircraft towards the ground. Each pulse is reflected back towards the aircraft from the ground surface and recorded by the laser scanner. The time taken for the laser energy to return can be converted to a distance by halving the time and multiplying by the speed of light. This means that as long as the position and attitude of the laser scanner is known accurately in relation to a cartographic referencing system,theheightofthegroundcanbefoundinthatreferencingsystem.Ahighperformance GPS linked to an inertial navigation system (INS) is used to provide the necessary position and attitude information for the sensor. The use of lasers in this way gives rise to the term ‘lidar’ (light detection and ranging) which is used synonymously with laser scanning.
  By attaching the laser to a scanning mechanism and firing it at very high frequencies, typically between 30 000 and 50 000 times per second, it is possible to collect so-called point clouds of height observations. The combination of the laser’s side-to-side scanning pattern and the forward motion of the aircraft results in a saw tooth pattern of observations limited by the maximum angle reached by the scanner either side of vertical. This angle is typically between 12 and 20 degrees. Ultimately the scanning angle, the velocity of the aircraft, its altitude, the scan frequency and the number of passes made by the aircraft determine the density of height observations recorded. Depending on the type of system and these parameters the current generation of laser scanners typically record points at densities which vary between 1 and 20 points per square m. Processing of the points into a regular grid results in a conventional digital terrain model (DTM) or digital elevation model (DEM).
  Given a correctly calibrated system, the accuracy of the observations is determined mainly by the quality of the GPS and INS systems. Operationally, the former is the key control on accuracy. Kinematic, differential GPS is needed to track the position of the laser scanner, so highly accurate surveys need a local GPS ground station. If this ground station is deployed within 30km of the survey site at an accurately surveyed location and it consists of a dual frequency receiver recording at two observations per second, then absolute accuracies of the laser scanner can be of the order of plus or minus 15cm. Relative accuracies may be considerablyhigher.InGreatBritaintheOrdnanceSurveyoperatesanetworkofsuchground stations covering much of the country. Where Ordnance Survey data or their equivalent are not available, a portable GPS ground station can be deployed in the field.
  For terrestrial applications such as archaeological survey, ‘eye-safe’ infrared lasers are generally used. The properties of the laser beam enable more information than just height to be recorded by the scanner. Each pulse of laser energy behaves rather like the beam of a torch in that it becomes broader with increasing distance from its origin. Eventually, it illuminates a circular area of ground known as the laser ‘footprint’. The great majority of laser scanners have a small footprint of between 10cm and 1.5m. If the footprint covers a solid object, say a concrete pavement, all of the laser energy will be reflected back to the scanner simultaneously. However, if it covers a surface which is porous to laser energy, say a woodland canopy, some will be reflected back, but some will penetrate through to be reflected from further down the canopy. If the laser pulse is sufficiently powerful and the canopy has gaps, some energy will penetrate completely to be reflected back from the ground. This means that the laser scanner will receive a distribution of energy back for each pulse. The start of the distribution is referred to as the ‘first pulse’ and will come from the canopy surface. The last part of the distribution will come from lower down the canopy or from the ground and is normally referred to as the last pulse.
  From the above, it can be inferred that as well as being able to measure heights very accurately, laser scanners can, to some extent, ‘see through’ vegetation to reveal the ground surface below. It is this capability which offers the possibility of developing algorithms to ‘remove’ vegetation and map the landscape it hides from conventional aerial cameras. Image analysis algorithms for vegetation removal are currently in their infancy and their properties will not be described here. Examples and evaluations of such algorithms can be found in Raber et al. (2002) and Sithole and Vosselman (2004). However, the potential of the technique for archaeological research and mapping can be demonstrated using a case study.
A case study
The test site was a prehistoric, fortified enclosure known as Welshbury Hill in the Forest of Dean. It is described in the Gloucestershire Sites and Monument Record (SAM 31186, 2004) as a ‘. . . univallate hillfort, subsequently strengthened by the provision of extra ramparts on the south and western sides, an earlier field system associated with an area of unenclosed settlement and a cairn situated on a narrow spur overlooking the valley . . . ’. The hillfort itself thus has three distinctive bank and ditch structures enclosing a roughly trapezoidal area. The ramparts appear to have been added subsequent to the original enclosure and they form a very distinctive landscape feature. In the immediate area there are numerous small scale and more subtle archaeological features including hut and charcoal platforms and boundaries from a possible Bronze Age field system.
  Part of the site has been the subject of considerable field investigation so there is a good existing record of the features which might be found. The whole area of the fort is covered by stands of both deciduous and coniferous woodland which have made both ground and aerial survey difficult. Indeed the Sites and Monument Record notes that in 1919, Welshbury camp was described as being ‘so thickly wooded that it was quite impossible to trace the entrenchments . . . ’ and in 2003, analysis of 1946 aerial photographs recorded that ‘only the western side of the hillfort’s earthworks could be seen due to the tree coverage . . . ’. Furthermore, the features which have been recorded range from large distinctive ramparts approximately 2.5 to 4m high to small, scattered charcoal platforms some 4 to 5m in diameter and only seen as an earthwork by a slight cut into the natural slope with a height difference of typically 0.5m or less.
  An airborne lidar survey of the site was carried out in February 2004 using the Cambridge Unit for Landscape Modelling’s Optech ALTM 3033 system deployed in a Piper Chieftain Navaho survey aircraft. Ground GPS support was provided by a dual frequency, Novatel receiver located at an Ordnance Survey passive recording station. The maximum distance from the base station to the most extreme point on the survey site was 28km whilst the shortest distance was 1.2km. Two separate surveys of the site were conducted to generate approximate point densities of 4 per square metre and 1 per square metre. The size of the laser footprint was set to a nominal 0.8m for the 4 points per metre survey and 1.25m for the 1 point per metre survey. By flying the surveys during winter, the deciduous canopy was devoid of leaf cover and the understorey vegetation was at a minimum, thus ensuring maximum laser penetration to the ground surface.
Analysis of data and interpretation of results
The survey point cloud data were converted to a 0.25m and 1m grid (for the high and low resolutions surveys, respectively) by assigning cells with the point value of the laser observation that falls within the cell. Where more than one laser observation was found in a cell the last one encountered in the point cloud was used. Empty cells were filled by smoothing their neighbours. Images were collected for first pulse, last pulse and intensity (the overall strength of the laser return). Figure 2 shows a vertical aerial photograph of the site, and Figure 3 shows the corresponding first pulse lidar image. The first pulse lidar data reveal the dense forest vegetation canopy in the vicinity of the hillfort and the aerial photograph shows the areas covered by deciduous trees (pale brown/red tones) and conifers (green tones). Neither image shows evidence of even the most distinctive features of the hillfort.
  A vegetation-removal algorithm was applied to the lidar data to create a digital elevation model (DEM) of the topography under the forest canopy. The DEM was then illuminated from an appropriate elevation and azimuth to reveal variations in terrain height which might be associated with archaeological features. Figure 4 shows the results of applying the vegetation-removal algorithm to the lidar data. Vegetation removal procedures rely on attempting to derive an accurate estimate of the ground height and then subtracting this from first pulse data which generally represent the top of the vegetation canopy. As the difference between first and last pulse heights becomes smaller, the accuracy of the last pulse height diminishes in reliability. As a consequence it is inadvisable to rely on first/last pulse differences when measuring some vegetation heights. More robust approaches rely on neighbourhood analysis of pooled first and last pulse data. Hopkinson et al. (2004) provide a detailed account of currently used methods.

Figure 2. In a conventional colour photograph of the study site the woodland canopy obscures almost all trace of the hill fort.
  The DEM resulting from the vegetation removal process shown in Figure 4 has been illuminated from the north-west at an elevation of 25 degrees using a standard GIS hillshading procedure. Comparison with a Royal Commission archaeological survey of the area (McOmish & Smith 1996) (Figure 5) demonstrates that the procedure has clearly revealed the major features of the hillfort, with the main ramparts evident. Given that these major fortifications are over 2.5m in height and covered by well-spaced, deciduous forest devoid of foliage, this is not entirely unexpected. However, it is also evident that many details of the field system enclosures can be seen in the south-east of the area. Here, the vegetation removal procedure has left some residual noise but nevertheless, subtle details of the field system can clearly be seen.
Discussion
A detailed, quantitative evaluation of the numbers and accuracy of features revealed by the technique is still to be completed. However, a walk-through survey of the site (Crow 2004)
Figure 3. The first pulse lidar data of the site gridded at a resolution of 25cm. This shows the top of the woodland canopy in detail.

Figure 4. The vegetation removal algorithm applied to the lidar data reveals the underlying archaeology in considerable detail.

Figure 5. The existing archaeological map of the site. Comparison with Figure 4 shows that more detail can be seen in the lidar data than is shown on the archaeological map (after McOmish & Smith 1996).
using the results of a rapid archaeological field survey of part of the hill (Hoyle 2003) has given early insights into the potential of the technique. Crow’s survey divided the site into some 76 vegetation zones. Each zone was visited and both vegetation properties (species present, canopy form and evaluation of likely laser penetration) and archaeological features were recorded to see if particular biases could be found in the accuracy of the results.
  The results of the survey indicate that the technique is extremely good at revealing even very subtle linear features. This is because the human eye has the capacity to filter discontinuities in such features caused by noise and lack of laser penetration. Good examples in addition to the ramparts include field system boundaries, lynchets and tracks. Whilst it should be noted that many of the herringbone patterns in the model are the result of forest clearance, it is nevertheless evident that there are features picked out on the DEM that correspond very well with the earthworks map (Figure 5) whilst suggesting possible others both within the Royal Commission survey area and beyond.
  One of the objectives of the walk-through survey was to examine the extent to which more detailed point features such as the charcoal platforms were revealed. These are too small to be seen in Figure 4, which has been scaled down substantially for publication. However, many small features are revealed in the data when viewed at full resolution. The conclusion of the field investigation was that many small features visible in the DEM corresponded with archaeological features on the ground (Crow 2004). Indeed, when guided in the field by the data shown in Figure 4, the field surveyors were able to detect new features. However, it was also found that not all of the features identified on previous field surveys could be seen in the lidar data. This discrepancy between the two surveys may result from the lidar showing very subtle features, missed during the earlier field survey, or non-archaeological features which were therefore not recorded. A number of these and other possible explanations are currently being investigated in an exercise that will include further field examination and identification of features shown only in the lidar data.
  It was noted above that the direction of the illumination source is important for feature detection and this might be part of the explanation regarding their ‘visibility’ in the lidar data. So far, experiments in which the illumination direction has been changed have not substantially altered the results. However, an investigation of both direction and elevation may still resolve this issue. Examination of Figure 4 also suggests that small features on the north-west slopes of the fort could be hidden by ‘over-illumination’ (Crow 2004) and this is another issue which is currently being addressed. Another element of the discrepancies might rest with poor quality GPS readings arising from forest canopy interference when recording locations in the field. Finally, there can be no doubt that particularly dense canopy situations will simply obscure the ground surface altogether and preclude feature detection.
Conclusions
The results described here represent the very early stages of developing and testing airborne lidar systems for archaeological reconnaissance. There can be little doubt that the results of this experiment highlight the potential of airborne lidar as an archaeological survey tool. Welshbury hillfort has proved to be an excellent site for evaluation of these techniques by virtue of its mixed forest structure, the wealth of archaeological survey data already available for validation and the variety of features it contains. Its woodland canopy means that mapping its archaeology by conventional methods is a time-consuming, difficult and expensive process.
  The use of lidar with vegetation-removal techniques demonstrably reveals much of the archaeology which is hidden by the canopy. Winter conditions in which deciduous trees have losttheirleavesareconducivetothisprocess.However,evenwheretherewasmature,thinned conifer plantation, the technique was still surprisingly successful. Linear features such as ditches and ramparts proved to be the most readily detectable but even some small, subtle featuressuchascharcoalplatformscouldbedetectedinthemodel.Undoubtedly,refinements arepossibletothevegetationremovalalgorithmtoremoveresidualnoisewhichisparticularly evident in the denser, coniferous area. With an absolute measurement accuracy of lidar systems which typically is of the order of plus or minus 15cm those features which are detected are mapped at an accuracy considerably higher than large scale Ordnance Survey data.
  It was demonstrated earlier in this paper that the detection of features in aerial photography, even in the absence of vegetation canopies is not guaranteed if they happen to be aligned with the sun and hence do not cast shadows. The use of hillshaded DEMs generated by lidar largely overcomes this problem because arbitrary directions and elevations for the illumination source can be tested. However, care still has to be taken to ensure that features are not missed as a consequence of over-illumination or lack of experimentation. At present the authors are examining a number of image analysis techniques which will enable images illuminated from different directions and elevations to be synthesised into a single product which is capable of revealing all of the features present in the data.
Acknowledgements
The authors are indebted to Tim Cockerell and Simon Roberts who conducted the lidar survey and deployed the GPS ground station used. They warmly acknowledge the support of the NERC Airborne Remote Sensing Facility who provided the Piper Chieftain Survey Aircraft. The UK Forestry Commission funded both the survey and the research described in the paper. Their support, together with the efforts of Sue Benham (of Forest Research) who collected much of the field data, was central to the success of the study. Thanks also to Jon Hoyle and staff from Gloucestershire County Council Archaeology Service involved with the Forest of Dean Archaeological Survey for providing archaeological data on Welshbury hillfort and the results of their rapid field survey. Finally, thanks are due to all of the staff at the Unit for Landscape Modelling who have made a major
  
contribution to the lidar programme.
References
Amable, G., B. Devereux, T. Cockerell & G. Renshaw. 2004. Analysis of the interaction patterns between vegetation canopies and small footprint, high density airborne lidar. Proceedings of the 20th International Society for Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing Congress, Istanbul, July 2004.
Bewley, R. 2003. Aerial survey for archaeology. Photogrammetric Record 18(104): 273-92.
Burnside, C. 1985. Mapping from aerial photographs. London: Collins.
Crawford, O.G.S. & A. Keiller. 1928. Wessex from the air. Oxford: Clarendon.
Crow, P. 2003. The potential applications of remote sensing as methods of prospecting for archaeological sites under woodland. Unpublished Forest Research report.
–2004. Forest Research Lidar Field Visit. Unpublished Forest Research Survey Report.
Devereux, B.J., G.S. Amable & T. Cockerell. 2004. Modelling the 3D structure of woodland canopies using a small footprint airborne laser scanner. Proceedings of the RSPOC annual conference, Aberdeen 8-11 Sept.
Hopkinson, C., K. Lim, L. Chasmer, P. Treitz, I. Creed & C. Gynan. 2004. Wetland grass to plantation forest – estimating vegetation height from the standard deviation of lidar frequency distributions. International Archives of
Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences XXXVI – 8/W2: 288-94.
Hoyle, J.P. 2003. Welshbury Wood, Blaisdon, Gloucestershire: a report on a rapid walk-over survey. Gloucestershire County Council Archaeological
Service. Draft report for the Forestry Commission.
Mead, P. 1983. The eye in the air. London: HMSO.
McOmish, D.S. & N.A. Smith. 1996. Welshbury Hillfort: a new survey by the Royal Commission on the historical monuments of England. Transactions of the Bristol and Gloucester Archaeological Society 114: 55-64.
Raber, G., J. Jensen, S. Schill & K. Schuckman. 2002. Creation of digital terrain models using an adaptive lidar vegetation point removal process. Photogrammetric Engineering and Remote Sensing 68(12): 1307-15.
SAM 31186 2004. Gloucestershire county council sites and monuments record 2004. Summary Report for Area 5161 (printout dated 10.19.04).
Sithole, G. & G. Vosselman. 2004. Experimental comparison of filter algorithms for bare-earth extraction from airborne laser scanning point clouds. ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing 59(1-2): 85-101.
St Joseph, J.K. 1977. The uses of air photography, 2nd edition. London: Baker.
Wilson, D.R. 2000. Air photo interpretation for archaeologists. Stroud: Tempus.
1 Unit for Landscape Modelling, University of Cambridge, Sir William Hardy Building, Tennis Court Rd.
Cambridge, CB2 1QB, UK (Email: bjd1@cam.ac.uk)
2 Unit for Landscape Modelling, University of Cambridge, Sir William Hardy Building, Tennis Court Rd. Cambridge, CB2 1QB, UK
3 Environmental and Human Sciences Division, Forest Research, Alice Holt Lodge, Wrecclesham, Farnham, Surrey,
GU10 4LH, UK
4 Department of Geography, University of Cambridge, Downing Place, Cambridge, CB2 3EN, UK
Received: 8 February 2005; Accepted: 14 March 2005; Revised: 4 April 2005 antiquity 79 (2005): 648–660
---------------
  
------------------------------------------------------------
  
  ---------------
  
  ------------------------------------------------------------
  
Detecting archaeological features using airborne lidar
  
B.J. Devereux et al.
  
648
  
649
  

  
648
  
