                                NOTES AND NEWS
which axes and adzes have been made, it is possible that further speci-
mens may, in the near future, be identified.
     In this regard it would not be out of place here to enumerate
examples of implements of ‘ Preselite ’ in England and Wales. England
has produced a single example-the cutting end of a very small axe
or chisel from Stockton Earthworks1 (ten miles northwest of Salisbury)
which is now in the Salisbury Museum. From Wales four examples
have hitherto been recorded, all of perforated axe-hammers of Beaker
type. The sites of discovery of these specimens were as follows :-
Arthog, Merionethshire ;2 Llanglydwen, Carmarthenshire ;8 Trelech
a’r Bettws, Carmarthenshire ;‘ Clap-yr-Arian, Llansantffraid Cwm-
deuddwr, Radnorshire.6 I am indebted to Mr Stuart Piggott for
drawing my attention to certain of these references.
                                                  ALEXANDER   KEILLER.
A POTSHERD FROM THE STONEHENGE DITCH (PLATE VII, A)
     Among the relics from the Society of Antiquaries’ excavations at
Stonehenge in 1920-26 exhibited in the Salisbury and South Wilts
Museum are two joined sherds of pottery numbered 1610/161      I. They
were found in ‘ Crater no. 2 ’ of the ditch, 18 inches from the bottom
and at the side. Crater no. 2 is that to the east of the causeway that
breaks the ditch opposite Aubrey Hole 20, near the ‘ South Barrow ’,
and the depth indicated makes it certain that the sherds derive from the
primary silt of the ditch, although in the report on this part of the
excavations in Ant. Journ. VI, 4, no mention is made of their discovery.
With no. 1610/11are preserved four further sherds of identical ware
with backing of shell and some chalk, but owing to the decay of their
surfaces no features remain. 1610/11however is ornamented in a
distinctive manner which immediately suggests certain parallels. It
has a rough chevron pattern executed in shallow groove technique,
the grooves showing longitudinal striations. Such ornament is
characteristic of a group of pottery recently recognized as belonging to
the Early Bronze Age in Britain and including the wares from Wood-
henge. The Stonehenge sherd can be paralleled from this site (e.g.,
nos. 26,42,44, of Mrs Cunnington’s Woodhenge) and may be compared
   1 Antiq. yourn., VI,   16.
   a   Arch. Camb. 1930,407.
       Zbid. 1930,407 ; 1935,270.
   ‘ I M . 1930, 407 ; 1935,270.
     Ibid. 1935,278.
                                     221
                             ANTIQUITY
even more closely, both as regards ornament and texture, with the
similar sherds found in 1920 at Ratfyn, near Amesbury (Wilts. Arch.
Mag. XLVII,62)and now in the Salisbury Museum. A comparison made
on the spot left no doubt of the identity of the Stonehenge sherd with
those from Ratfyn.
     The sherd is of considerable importance in deciding the date of
the Stonehenge ditch, for it shows that the primary silting of the ditch
was formed in the Early Bronze Age, and the evidence of the two groups
of beaker fragments found on the top of this silt (Ant.yourn. VIII, 150,
151, 173) shows it to have been completed within this period.
     The writer of this note is deeply indebted to Mr Frank Stevens,
Controller of the Salisbury and South Wilts Museum, for his permission
to publish the sherd, and for the photograph which illustrates it.
                                                      STUARTPIGGOTT.

INTERNATIONAL PREHISTORIC CONGRESS AT OSLO.
     The third and definitive circular giving prospectus and informa-
tion concerning this Congress has now been issued. Copies may be
obtained either direct from the Secretariat, International Congress of
Prehistoric Sciences, c/o Universitetets Oldsaksamling, Oslo, Norway,
or through Mr C. F. C. Hawkes of the British Museum, as secretary
(jointly with Prof. V. G. Childe) for Great Britain.
     The Congress meets in the first week (3rd-9th) of August. Under
the presidency of Prof. A. W. Brogger, and with Prof. J. L. Myres as one
of the general secretaries, the organizing committee is getting together
a programme of first-rate interest. Northern archaeology naturally
takes a primary place, but contributions from almost all countries cover
a wide field. From this country alone there are some thirty contribu-
tions on subjects ranging from the Stone Age in India and North Africa
to Art in the Dark Ages. There will be several important papers on
Near Eastern and Mediterranean archaeology, and megaliths and their
relationships take a leading place among the subjects contributed from
the British Isles. In fact, in the earlier as well as in the later phases of
prehistory from the Late Bronze Age onwards, there will be a great deal,
both from Britain itself and from abroad, of the closest concern to those
interested in British archaeology. Above all, a Congress like this
affords a pleasant chance of making personal contacts with fellow-
archaeologists abroad-perhaps indeed this is really the most valuable
thing about it.
                                    222
