Notes
Raising the Stonehenge lintels in Czechoslovakia
PAVEL PAVEL*
In the usual explanation, the lintels of Stonehenge were raised on a timber crib. A new, partial Concretehenge in Bohemia offers an alternative method,
  
Strakonice is a small town (25,000 inhabitants) in South Bohemia, where you can see a piece of old England in the centre of the town: a concrete copy of one of Stonehenge's trilithons on a bank of the Otava river.
  My hobby is experimental archaeology, especially old building and transport methods. Stonehenge is very well known in my country. I was interested especially in how the lintels were put up, and I have produced my own new theory.
  The principle was very simple. I suggested using two beams instead of a pile of stone or soil for erecting a lintel Two other beams were used as levers. I made a small clay model and simulated the lifting on it. It looked very easy.
  

FIGURE 1. Diagram showing the lifting technique.
 telakovského 250, 38601 Strakonice, Czechoslovakia.
ANTIQUITY 66 (1992): 389—91
	390	NOTES
  
   I decided to build a full-size concrete replica of part of Stonehenge. The town council granted me a good place for this purpose. Mr B.K. Davison (English Heritage) sent me plans and drawings of the uprights and lintels. I obtained some money and construction materials from local firms. Friends and enthusiasts helped too. We finished the replica in autumn 1990. The height of the uprights is 3.90 m and the weight of the lintel is 5 Imperial tons  (5124 kg).
  We began the tests in spring 1991. My method consisted of pulling the lintel up two sloping oak beams leaning against the uprights, 10 m in length and average diameter 40 cm. The lintel lay on the ground near the lower ends of the sloping beams. We put two spruce beams horizontally across the tops of the uprights. They were our levers, 4.5 m long and average diameter 25 cm. The shorter part of the lever was under the lintel, the longer behind the monument (FIGURES 1 & 2).
  The group of labourers pulled these longer parts down, and the opposite end rose up, in a step of about 30 cm. A beam was fastened across the sloping beams by ropes to stop the lintel sliding down between pulls (FIGURE 3). The lintel was fastened to the lever at both ends by two 45-m long ropes 30 mm in diameter, each looped round twice, so the lintel was pulled by 8 runs of rope altogether. We discovered that the lintel needed a traction on the sloping beams of about 30,000 Newtons, so that each length of rope was subject to a strain of about 3750 Newtons.
  We de-barked the sloping beams and lubricated the surface with fat before the experiment.
  It was a surprise for us that only 10 labourers were needed to raise the lintel. One person was stationed on top of each upright, and a second to stop the lintel moving back. The other labourers acted as a living load on the longer part of the lever. The work with 10 men took a lot of time, and it was quicker with two working groups. The lintel fell down during one of our tests.
  We finished the experiments in July 1991 (FIGURE 4). Have we discovered the actual way the Stonehenge lintels were put on the uprights? It is difficult to justify such a *claim. We say only that this method is possible. Raising the lintel took us only three days.
  The town magistrate of our town decided that our Strakonice Stonehenge will be a monument in the town's centre for ever. You are invited to visit it when you come to Czechoslovakia.
FIGURE 2. The lintel ready for lifting.
  
391
NOTES
FIGURE 3. The lintel raised halfway, at the end of the first day's work.
FIGURE 4. The lintel in position.
