142	ANTIQUITY
  
the lip or muzzle of a vicious 01 nervous horse, restrains it during an operation. The 'chevétre' operates on a similar principle of compression of the nasal area or some other part of the head, but it forms part of a simple harness on animals used for riding or traction (see des Ormeaux, 1889).
  Finally, I am fully aware of the impact which Man the hunter has made on archaeological thinking in the last decade—hence my use of the past tense in relation to the old view of savage hunters in a harsh environment; but is Littauer not aware that this same decade has seen a profound reexamination of man-resource relationships in prehistory, of the criteria of domestication, and above all of the animal economies of the late Pleistocene? While Littauer is still trying to pinpoint the origins of domestication, many scholars would now argue that such cradles of invention are illusory, and that man-animal relations should be seen in terms of a broad spectrum which certainly includes tame decoys, but also a great many other possibilities. Nor does this mean that control of animals in the
Raising the lintels at Stonehenge
To those who read the November 1979 issue of this journal (pp. 190—4) Mr J. E. Garfitt will need no introduction. He is here rounding off his article on 'Moving the stones to Stonehenge' with a note and some drawings on how he surmises the lintels at Stonehenge were raised. We have not, on this occasion, asked our busy Trustee, Professor Atkinson, to comment, but there may be other readers who have other ideas. If they are practical they will receive due consideration.
The problem of how the lintels were placed in position on top of the upright stones by a society with only primitive means at its disposal is a fascinating one. It calls for an explanation of how stones measuring, on average, 10•5 ft long by 3 •5 ft wide and ft thick (32 m X 1•06m X
m), weighing 6•75 tons, were placed so accurately that the mortices on their under-surfaces coincided with the tenons on the standing stones; that the levels of the tops of the lintels were true all round the circle with a tolerance of only seven inches (17-7 cm) after standing for some 3,000 years; that the ends of adjacent lintels fitted accurately in tongue-and-groove joints with their neighbours; and that when assembled both the inner and outer sides of the lintels together would make continuous circles.
Palaeolithic was necessarily a 'once and for all' phenomenon: such relations are not irreversible, e.g. the gazelle in the Near East, or the barbary sheep in North Africa (Legge, 1972 ; Saxon, 1974), In short, Littauer's views seem to lie within the old hunter/herder dichotomy which is simplistic, useless, and even a hindrance to prehistory. The spirit of de Mortillet lives, but I believe it is fading fast.
BAY-PETERSEN, J. 1975. Preneolithic faunal exploitation in Southern France and Denmark (Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, University of Cambridge).
LEGGE, A. J. 1972. Prehistoric exploitation of the gazelle in Palestine, in (ed.), E. S. Higgs, Papers in economic prehistory (Cambridge), 119—24.
ORMEAUX, A-L. des. 1889. Note sur l'usage des batons de bois de rennes chez les populations primitives de l'Europe, Rev. d'Ethnog., Vll, 39—51.
SAXON, E. c. 1974. Results of recent investigations at Tamar Hat, Libyca, XXII, 49—91.
TOUSSAINT, H. & Abbé DUCROST. 1873. Le Cheval dans la station préhistorique de Solutré, Assoc. Franr. Avanc. Sciences (Lyon), 586—600.
  The currently accepted theory is that the necessary high degree of accuracy was obtained by measurements, and that the lintels were lifted by a system of cribwork fully described by Atkinson (1956) and beautifully demonstrated by models in Devizes Museum.
  While the use of cribwork as described would be a perfectly effective way of lifting the lintels, it would be extremely laborious, calling for the raising and dismantling of one mile-run (1 •6 km) of timber, six inches (152 mm) square and cut by some means to a reasonable degree of accuracy, for each individual lintel. When the lintel had been raised on to the working platform at the level of the top of the upright stones, the final masoning would have to be done and the lintel fitted in position before the dismantling of the cribwork could be put in hand. This implies either the use of prodigious quantities of squared timber or a very great timescale in completing the monument.
	NOTES AND NEWS	143

(a) Erecting stone without sheerkgs(b) Erecting stone using sheer(egs
(c) Form of/eg to be usedin sheer(egs(d) Lifting baulk with theaid ofadditionalsheer/eys
(e) Lintelready to be turnedintoposition on top ofstone(f) Front view ofsheer/egsFig. r. (Braces omitted for (d) and (e), and scaffolding for (e), for clarity)  A clue to a possible alternative method of raising the lintels is provided by the raising of the upright stones. Evidence from excavation shows that this was done by grading one side of the hole prepared to accept the base of the stone which was then drawn backwards down the slope. This left the stone at a low angle to the horizontal from which, by means of ropes and levers, it could finally be brought to a vertical position. This angle would, however, be so low that the effort of direct hauling by ropes would be largely negatived (FIG. la). Equally, the use of levers to raise the head of the stone to a height at which direct handling would be effective has limited application. It is almost certain, therefore, that a people so determinedly effcient in handling monoliths would have used sheerlegs to alter the angle of the pull. Sheerlegs or sheers consist of a frame of spars, in its simplest form a triangle, attached to a rope at some mid-point. Used between puller and the load they give a raising moment to the latter (FIG. 1b).
  The raising of the upright stones also implies the use of ropes adequately strong to take the loads involved. Ropes of considerable strength can be made from wild clematis, used either in the natural state or alternatively twisted or plaited. Clematis, old man's beard or traveller's joy (Clematis vitalba) is a common component of the flora of chalk and limestone country and would be available in quantity. Data for the breaking-strain of such cables are not available but since they were almost certainly used in hauling the stones to Stonehenge in the first place, very considerable strength in tension can be assumed.
  If we accept the use of sheerlegs and strong ropes of vegetable fibre, the detail of the method of raising the lintels can be assumed to be approximately as follows. First, a set of sheerlegs will be prepared from two matching trees, each having a branch at approximately the same height. These branches will be shortened and trimmed in such a way that when the sheers are assembled the two branch-stubs will stand out at right-angles to the plane of the sheers (FIGS IC, d). It will be clear that any object lying across these stubs will be supported by the natural strength of the timber.
144	ANTIQUITY  Secondly, a baulk of light timber, probably willow or lime (each of which has a weight of 28 1b (12•7 kg) a cubic foot at 15 per cent moisture content) will be prepared to the approximate dimensions of the lintel. This will be laid in position on the stubs of the sheerlegs and secured by rawhide thongs; these carry no weight, their only purpose being to prevent accidental dislodging of the baulk. Using a second sheerlegs as intermediary, the baulk is raised to the top of the upright stones where carpenters accept it on a temporary scaffold (FIG. re). Its weight, approximately 1•15 tons, will allow it to be manoeuvred with levers. Being positioned immediately against the upright stones, the baulk can be marked to show the locations of the required mortices. The carpenters will then cut these from the soft wood (lime is the craftsman's choice for carving) and then fit the wooden lintel in position. At this stage the chamfering, shaping, and cutting of the tongue-and-groove end joints will be done, to complete the perfect model of the required lintel.
  Thirdly, the baulk is lowered as it was raised, and the masons get to work to copy it in every detail. When completed it is raised in the same way as was used for the timber baulk although greater haulage power will, of course, be required to raise the heavier weight. When exactly in position against the side of the two upright stones, the lintel will be rotated carefully into its final position on the tenons by two sets of parbuckles acting against each other, so giving absolute control of the slightest movement. (Parbuckling is the method employed to roll beer-barrels slowly into and out of inn-cellars, using a loop of rope fixed at the top of the slope and brought under and round the barrel.)
  The sheerlegs can be moved comparatively easily, so that if scaffolding were erected at several pairs of upright stones a number of timber baulks could be lifted into position within a very short time, thus allowing the carpenters—and subsequently the masons—to work on several lintels simultaneously. In fact it is probable that a timber lintel, once prepared, could be used, with slight modifications, for several pairs of uprights.
  It will be seen that this system of using patterns, or 'mock-ups', dispenses with the need for complicated measurements and makes a considerable reduction in the time required to erect the lintels. No geometry is required beyond that involved in achieving the level tops of the uprights in the first place. The method calls for no special skills not already known to be possessed by the megalith builders.
Transhumance, Spain and ethnoarchaeologyATKINSON, R. J. c. 1956. Stonehenge (London).
  
Iain Davidson, of the Department of Prehistory and Archaeology, The University of New England, Armidale, New South Wales, has sent us the following reply to Bob Chapman's 'Transhumance and megalithic tombs in Iberia', published in 'Antiquity last July (Llll, 1979, 150-2).
Chapman's comments on the relevance of historical and modern transhumance in Spain as an analogy for the interpretation of prehistoric data are timely and valuable. In criticizing the work of Higgs (1976), however, his argument shows the same basic weakness as Higgs's: a weakness repeated in many recent studies in ethnoarchaeology.
  The weakness of Higgs's argument lay in his use of the cartographic representation of modern routes as the basis of his analogy, without discussion of the political factors which make some aspects of the modern economy likely to be different from the past one. On the other hand, Chapman discussed only the political factors. The weakness of Higgs's analogy, and Chapman's 'spoiler' (cf. Yellen, 1977, 8) is that neither examined explicitly the ecological patterning which created the similarities between modern, historical and ancient economies, although Higgs had certainly discussed this with his students (pers. comm.). Neither paper considered the different solutions to the ecological problem presented by these patterns—that is, the adaptations which form the basis of economic and social change during the prehistory of the peninsula.
  Systematic seasonal movements of stock, and the practice of seasonal use of supplementary feed in certain areas is remarkable in Spain because the patterns remain constant despite changing technology. Fribourg (1910) showed that the basic patterns remained unaltered by the recently introduced practice of moving stock by train. My own work in Spain has shown that these patterns are preserved today (FIG. 1). For the Pyrenees the most significant effect of the introduction of motorized transport on the pastoral system would seem to be the ecological impact of the reduced number of horses and mules. Without these animals to remove the rough old grasses at the beginning of the annual grazing succession (cf. Bell, 1970) the quality of the highland pastures is impaired and sheep numbers are consequently reduced. Transhumance continues to be an economically viable system, though social and demographic factors
