Notes and News
RECENT WORK AT STONEHENGE
    By kind permission of the Editor, we reprint below (with one slight alteration) an article published in the Times, Aug. 4th last.
    The earliest monument on the site—Stonehenge 1 (FIG. l)—consisted of a bank with external ditch, about 300 feet in diameter, with a wide entrance to the northeast. Outside this entrance stood a single undressed sarsen (sandstone boulder) upright, the Heel Stone, within a small encircling ditch. Inside the bank was a circle of 56 large ritual pits, the Aubrey Holes, which had held neither stones nor posts, but had been deliberately filled, sometimes with subsequent excavation and a second refilling, in prehistoric times. Deposits of human cremated bones were also found in these pits and elsewhere in the ditch, bank, and adjacent area of the interior.
    This type of monument, the cremation burials and the objects found with them— long bone pins and a polished stone macehead—are all typical of the Secondary Neolithic cultures of Britain, early in the second millennium B.C. Charcoal from an Aubrey Hole excavated in 1950 gave a radio-active carbon reading which indicated a probable range of date between 2123 and 1573 B.C.
    Although there is no direct evidence of stone structures other than the Heel Stone in Stonehenge 1, nevertheless chips of rhyolite of the Blue Stone series described below were found in the bottom of the ditch round the Heel Stone, and low in the silting of the main ditch. Some Blue Stone monument must, therefore, have stood either on the site or not far away.
    Indeed, the next constructional phase—Stonehenge 11 (FIG. 2)—involved the use of the famous Blue Stones, mainly spotted dolerite, rhyolite, and volcanic ash, all from the Prescelly Mountains in Pembrokeshire. There is reason to think that this phase followed quickly after the completion of Stonehenge 1, and the Beaker pottery associated with it is broadly contemporary with the Secondary Neolithic cultures to which Stonehenge 1 can be assigned. The recognition of this early Blue Stone monument was only made possible by this season's excavations within the stone circles themselves.
    In their present positions the Blue Stones stand in two settings, a circle and a horseshoe, within the great sarsen peristyle of lintelled uprights, the circle lying between this and the sarsen trilithons. Excavation of an arc of this Blue Stone circle revealed, next to a surviving standing stone, three successive stumps of stones deliberately broken to below turf level, and, and, beyond these, sockets for two destroyed stones before the next survivor—now fallen—is reached. The spacing was very close indeed, and the whole circle must have consisted of about 60 stones.
    But the excavation showed that, in their present setting, the Blue Stones are rearranged from an earlier structure approximately of the same radius, but consisting of a double circle, each of about 35 stones, the inner circle set only six feet within the outer one. Each adjacent pair of stones stood at the two ends of a large radially set dumbbell-shaped hole, which was then firmly packed with chalk rubble. After the stones had been removed from these double stone-holes, which had then been repacked, they were set in their present position in such a manner that their sockets sometimes impinged or cut into the earlier holes, or, in places, missed them altogether because of their wider spacing. But between the removal of the original double circle and its resetting came a decisive point in the history of the monument, the erection of the sarsens in the first
ANTIQUITY
phase of Stonehenge 111, described below. It could be shown stratigraphically that a stone-hole of the outer sarsen circle cut through rammed chalk filling replaced in one of the double Blue Stone stone-holes after the removal of the stones.
    The double circle of Stonehenge 11 had its entrance (excavated in 1926, and apparently marked by an additional pair of stones set on the inside) aligned not centrally over
	D I T C H	D I TC H
	EXCAVATED	UNEXCAVATED
• HEEL STOKE C DITCH
t
300'FIG. I. SKETCH-DIAGRAM OF STONEHENGE, PHASE 1
the causeway of the ditch of Stonehenge 1, but on what is now the axis of the whole monument, the orientation on the midsummer sunrise marked by the Avenue, which may well belong to Stonehenge 11, though it could be a part of Period 111. The deliberate refilling of part of the ditch at the entrance in ancient times, noted in the excavation of the 1920s, would have taken place at the same time, as it makes the entrance symmetrical with the Avenue and the axis of the stone structure of Periods 11 and 111.
NOTES AND NEWS
    Stonehenge 111 can be divided into three constructional phases. The first we have already touched on—the removal of the original double Blue Stone circle to erect the sarsens. Presumably the complete plan of the sarsen structure was decided on at this point, and with it would go the so-called Four Stations (small sarsen uprights, two enclosed by ring-ditches) whose diameters cross on the centre of the main structure : they stand just without the bank of Stonehenge 1. In Stonehenge 111 (a), therefore, we should have the erection of the sarsen peristyle and horseshoe of great trilithons, and
		A x 1 5
1 926 EXCAVATION
80'FIG. z. SKETCH-DIAGRAM OF BLUE STONES IN STONEHENGE, PHASE 11
the outlying Four Stations and the originally upright Slaughter Stone, probably one of a pair between which the axis passed.
    Stonehenge 111 (b) is the most problematic phase of all, but it is suggested that the 59 holes which surround the sarsen peristyle in two irregular rings, the Y and Z holes, may have been intended to take the Blue Stones in a scheme which was never carried out. The irregularity of the lay-out of these circles implies that they were not struck from a centre, and that the presence of the sarsen uprights prevented such a procedure ; they were allowed to silt up naturally after they had been dug, and do not seem to have ever held uprights of wood or stone.
ANTIQUITY
    The last phase, Stonehenge 111 (c), would see the completion of the monument by the resetting of the 60 Blue Stones in a close-set single circle inside the sarsen peristyle ; and the erection of 19 additional Blue Stones to form a horseshoe within the sarsen trilithons. The surviving stones of this horseshoe setting are all fine pillars of spotted dolerite, larger and better worked than the survivors of the circle, and conceivably represent a second importation of stones either from Prescelly, or from a local monument in which they were incorporated. Two stones of the horseshoe have the traces of tenons on their tops ; two lintels were re-used as uprights in the Blue Stone circle. One stone of the horseshoe has an enigmatic groove worked down its edge, and another a corresponding ridge.
    All these features point to an original Blue Stone monument incorporating features which included trilithons with mortice-and-tenon jointing as well as an appreciation of tongue-and-groove technique. With our new knowledge of the priority of some form of Blue Stone monument actually on the site before the sarsen structure, it looks more and more as if these constructional features, which form so striking a feature of the sarsen trilithons and peristyle today, may have been devised first for a Blue Stone monument, and later copied on a majestic scale in sarsen.
    Direct evidence for the date of Stonehenge 111 is lacking, and, indeed, archaeological material in association with the stone structures on the site is exceedingly rare. But the recognition last year of prehistoric carvings on certain of the sarsens, apparently contemporary with the original dressings of the surfaces of the stones, gives us a lead. The representations of bronze axe-blades accurately show types in use in Britain around the middle of the second millennium B.C., and especially in the brilliant local Bronze Age of Wessex.
    A hafted dagger, if an equally accurate representation, would appear to depict no type current in western Europe or Britain at this time, and its nearest parallels would be in the Mycenaean world of the 16th or 15th century B.C. The much-weathered carving cannot confidently be identified as representing such a dagger, but such a connexion would be by no means improbable in the framework of the prehistory of the period. Around Stonehenge are grouped the barrow-cemeteries of what must have been the ruling clans or dynasties—the royal tombs of the Wessex Bronze Age. The earliest burials in these cemeteries go back to Neolithic and Early Bronze Age times in the opening centuries of the second millennium, and they culminate in the richly furnished graves of the fifteenth century or so. In these and similar tombs we find evidence of far-flung commercial contacts stretching to Bohemia, Ireland, and the Mycenaean world itself.
    Stonehenge is unique, the individual creation of an architect whose capabilities in design and proportion were far beyond those of barbarian north-west Europe at the time, and if we look for likely orgins it is to the Aegean we would naturally turn. The circumstances of the contacts, the designing, and the command of skilled labour involved are things we can never know from archaeological evidence, but we can at least clarify the sequence of construction and define its chronological limits. STUART PIGGOTT.
THE LOWER BESSARABIAN VALLUM
    Recent work on the linear earthworks of Britain adds interest to a recently published and accessible study (in French) of the vallum of Lower Bessarabia. The article, by Professor Radu Vulpe of Bucharest, appeared in the Festschrift presented to Gavril Kazarow (Bulletin de l'Institut archéologique bulgare, vol. XVI, 89—98) ; it contains a full bibliography of the more detailed and less accessible sources of information.
    The vallum, a linear earthwork running from the River Pruth to the lagoon of Conduc on the Black Sea, is a composite work (FIG. 1). The first stretch of 21 miles, starting on
221

221

221

