NOTES AND NEWS

caused, at possibly a considerable remove in time, a gradual rise in the level of the regional water body and the consequent expansion of high watertable oasis areas with perennial vegetation and with water exploitable through very shallow wells. These conditions could have encouraged animal husbandry and even agriculture (by then import
Recent excavations at Stonehenge
In April 1978 a number of small excavations was done at Stonehenge by the Department of Archaeology, University College, Cardiff, under the direction of the writers of this note. These were designed largely to obtain data about the environment of Stonehenge before, during and after the various construction stages, and with the specific intention of sampling the buried soils and ditch deposits for land-snail analysis. The work is to be written up as part of a larger project on the later prehistoric landscape of southern Wessex. This preliminary note is to report on a human burial of Beaker age, the first from Stonehenge, which was discovered in the ditch deposits and which was associated with some interesting grave goods.
  A part of the excavation involved re-opening the section across the Stonehenge I ditch, originally cut by R.J.C.A. in July 1954, and cleaning back the faces to obtain a suitable surface from which to take soil samples. The main features of the section are enumerated below, and this interpretation differs significantly from that reported in Stonehenge (Atkinson, 1960). There were three main layers: (a) primary fill; (b) secondary fill; (c) modern soil. The primary fill consisted of clean chalk rubble and it was considered that some of this material had been deliberately thrown back in. The secondary fill, or 'rainwash', consisted of finer, more humic material and was probably a slow accumulation of earth and fine chalk caused by animal erosion and rainwashing off the bank surface. It had been much disturbed by animal burrows.
  Between the primary and secondary fill was a thin discontinuous zone of humic material. This has previously been considered as a buried soil formed during a standstill in the accumulation. We now, however, think that it is humic material derived from the original soil as the ditch sides collapsed. In other words we see it as a part of the primary fill.
able from, for example, Egypt) with a renewed onslaught on the fragile desert flora around the oases.
  There are many other points, for instance those crocodiles, that I could make, but space does not permit.	ROBERT RAIKES
PLATE xxvll
  The modern soil was remarkable in the pronounced development of the zones in it. These were the worm-sorted humus horizon, the flint zone at its base, and the split-pea zone below this, the whole occupying a maximum depth of 55 cm.
  The significance of these observations is that the entire fill probably accumulated as a single continuous depositional process, and without a standstill phase until approximately the level of the present surface.
  In the north-west section of the excavation an ill-defined cut was apparent, originating at the base of the modern soil and extending to the surface of the primary fill. Although we noted this when drawing the section we considered it simply to be a major animal disturbance, which indeed it partly was. It was not until an accidental collapse of the section at this point revealed bones of a human foot that we recognized it as a grave. Accordingly the excavation was extended and a crouched skeleton, much disturbed by animal burrowing, was uncovered (PL. XXVII a).
  The grave had been cut into the silting of the ditch against its outer side. Its centre lay 53•75 m from the centre of the sarsen circle, on a true bearing of 23 0 45'. The bottom of the grave was at 100•oo m above OD and 1'25 m below the local surface of the silt. The fill of the grave was darker than the surrounding secondary fill. It contained three pieces of bluestone and a piece of chalk the edges of which had been grooved. None of these objects was in direct association with the burial.
  The skeleton (PL. xxvll a) was that of a young adult male, lying on the back with the head to the north-west and the legs flexed to the left. The left arm was straight and the right bent at the elbow across the chest. The right humerus and ribs, and the lumbar vertebrae, had been displaced towards the knees by burrowing animals, and a number of other bones had been moved even further and were not recovered—notably the right fibula.
The grave-goods (PL. XXVII b) consisted of three

235
ANTIQUITY

barbed-and-tanged flint arrowheads and a polished stone bracer. One of the arrowheads lay immediately below the lumbar region, and may have been disturbed; a second was alongside the distal portion of the right radius; the third was in the thoracic region just to the left of the fourth thoracic vertebra. The bracer, of dark slate, measuring 11 •o cm long by cm wide by cm thick, lay parallel to the inner side of the middle of the left radius. This appears to be the first recorded association of flint arrowheads with a bracer of this type in Britain.
  This discovery requires a re-interpretation of the stratigraphy of the ditch silting. In 1954 a fragment of bluestone (rhyolite) was found at a
  depth of m immediately above the dark soil streak, which represents collapsed turf undercut by the erosion of the lips of the ditch and rests upon the coarse primary fill. At the time this fragment was taken to show (Atkinson, 1960; 24,
Goat's Hole cave: a footnote
It occurs to us that some readers may be unfamiliar with the mode of expression used for the error limits of a radiocarbon date cited in a recent note in Antiquity (Lil, 1978, 143—5) in which the date was accompanied by different plus and minus error figures thus :
18,000 +1400 —1200 bp (Birm-146)
  The reason for this is that the error limits of a radiocarbon date are strictly speaking also radiocarbon 'ages' calculated from the same data as the date itself and are therefore points on the same exponential decay curve. The plus error is always numerically larger than the minus error due to the shape of this curve, but the asymmetry that results is usually only important where older dates are concerned, especially those where the error of the 70, 90) that the bluestones had arrived at Stonehenge soon after the formation of the primary fill, an inference since contradicted by radiocarbon dates. This fragment can now be seen to have lain in the filling of the grave at its extreme south-east edge. The lowest undisturbed bluestone fragments from the 1954 excavation lie at a depth of 25 cm below the top of the chalky rainwash which forms the uppermost layer of fill. It is probable, therefore, that the greater part of the infilling visible today had already formed when the bluestones were brought to Stonehenge.
R. J. C. ATKINSON and J. G. EVANS
Acknowledgement : Thanks are due to the Directorate of Ancient Monuments, Department of the Environment, for permission and facilities for this excavation.
ATKINSON, R.* J. C. 1960. Stonehenge (Harmondsworth, Middlesex).
measurement is large. For all other dates the error standard deviation, c) can be satisfactorily expressed as a single figure by using the slightly larger plus error term.
  It is worth noting, en passant, that in those instances where different plus and minus errors are given it will not strictly be suffcient in widening the errors to 20 simply to multiply by 2. This will lead to a significant underestimate of the upper (+) error limit and an overestimate of the lower error, again due to the exponential form of the error curve. Again, the majority of radiocarbon dates, those with which a single ± error figure is quoted, are not seriously affected by this.
Aerial reconnaissance: recent results, 46	PLATE xxxllRICHARD BURLEIGH and THEY A MOLLESON

This note is concerned with two large, roughly circular enclosures recorded some years ago in terms of cropmarks. Both have some claim to be early ecclesiastical sites. The first is at Inch Abbey, Co. Down, a well-known Cistercian abbey founded in 1180, or thereabouts. * The photograph (PL. XXXII a), a view to the S, shows the remains of the abbey, now set amongst trees near the N bank of the river Quoile, here flowing north-eastwards towards the SW corner of Strangford Lough some 7 km distant. Inch is within the drumlin belt of Co. Down: the Cistercian abbey lies in a sheltered hollow between two of these whale-backed glacial mounds; that to the left (E) rises to just over 30 m, that to right to about 24 m. Immediately beyond the river, a third drumlin may be distinguished : its crest is crossed by a prominent hedgerow. In the distance, are the earthworks of the great motte and bailey, 'Rathkeltair', NW of Downpatrick. The surface drainage in such country often

236


PLATE x x VI 1 : RECENT EXCAVATIONS AT STONEHENGE
a : Stonehenge. Burial of Beaker age. Two of the arrowheads are visible, one just above the sacrum, the other by the right radius. The bracer can be seen by the left radius. b : Grave goods associated with burial of Beaker age
See pp. 235-6	Photo : b. Eric Broadbent
