A rival to Stonehenge? Geophysical survey at Stanton Drew, England
Andrew David1, Mark Cole2, Tim Horsley3, Neil Linford1, Paul Linford1, Louise Martin1
The development of geophysical survey remains a spearhead-priority for new research and cultural resource management alike – since geophysics can find and map sites without destroying them. However, there are current weaknesses of sensitivity and resolution – the instruments cannot easily “see” small features like graves and post-holes of which so many ancient sites are principally composed. Great hopes have been invested in caesium vapour magnetometers, which the Centre for Archaeology has been promoting in England – perhaps nowhere with such dramatic success as at Stanton Drew, Somerset. Here, geophysical techniques have brought to light the lines of broad circles belonging to a previously unrecognised henge monument, and the caesium magnetometer showed these circles to be composed of individual pits about 1.4 m in diameter. The fine focus achieved for these buried features augers well for the discovery and preservation of similar sites and monuments in the future.
Keywords: Neolithic, England, remote mapping, geophysical survey, caesium magnetometry, henge
Introduction
In November 1997 news broke of the discovery near Bristol of a vast circular timber temple that dwarfed Stonehenge in scale, arousing quite a frenzy of interest and speculation (Pitts 2001). Preliminary accounts of the survey, and the geophysical images, were released on the Internet and elsewhere (David 1998a,b), and the discovery received notice in Nature (Aveling 1997). Thankfully, the limelight did not draw excessive crowds, nor turn Stanton Drew into a major new neo-Pagan shrine, as some had feared it might, and the site has since subsided back into its tranquil pastoral setting, left to the sheep and a steady trickle of curious visitors for whom the new findings are briefly described in a leaflet. So, now that the dust and hyperbole have settled, we are taking the opportunity to report in more detail upon our initial geophysical survey at Stanton Drew, and the results of additional survey in 2000.
Background
Stanton Drew (Figures 1, 2) has long been known as a megalithic site composed of three stone circles, known as North-East, South-South-West and the Great Circle which is second
1 Centre for Archaeology, English Heritage, Fort Cumberland, Portsmouth PO4 9LD, UK
2 64 Agraria Road, Guildford GU2 5LG, UK
3 Dept of Archaeological Sciences, University of Bradford, West Yorkshire BD7 1DP, UK
Received: 14 April 2003; Accepted: 2 September 2003; Revised: 22 December 2003

Figure 1.  Plan of the Stanton Drew megalithic complex showing the location of the geophysical survey grids. © Crown Copyright Ordnance Survey. All rights reserved.

Figure 2.  Watercolour drawing of the ‘Druidical remains at Stanton Drew, Somerset’ by J. C. Buckler, 1834. Reproduced courtesy of the Somerset Archaeological and Natural History Society.
in size only to Avebury. There are also two stone ‘avenues’, a ‘Cove’ and at least one outlying stone, known as Hauteville’s Quoit. From the first it has drawn comparisons with its grander cousin at Avebury but, being of apparently more modest scale, and not astride a main road, it has received much less attention. It was John Aubrey, responsible for the ‘re-discovery’ of Avebury, who seems to have been the first to make written reference to Stanton Drew, in 1664, in the manuscript intended for publication as the ‘Monumenta Britannica’ (Fowles & Legg 1980, 1982). The site was in cultivation at the time, the ripe barley not allowing Aubrey to survey the stones. He noted that ploughing might have erased any encircling ‘trench’ and also that the stones were ‘much diminished within these few years’ owing to being broken up by the villagers whose land they encumbered. Aubrey supplied a sketch dismissed with good reason by a later commentator as ‘little better than a mere jumble’ (Dymond 1896b).
cove to add geometric and
Figure 3.  ‘A View of the Celtic Temple called The Weddings at Stanton Drew July
numerical harmony to the 1723’, by William Stukeley. whole. He also speculated
that the ground skirting the works would make an ‘admirable cursus for races of horses, chariots, and the like’ (ibid. 176). At variance with Aubrey, he believed the site to have been undamaged until some years before his visit when stones were buried ‘for covetousness of the little space of ground they stood upon’. Pre-empting later non-intrusive survey, he notes that ‘Many [buried stones] may be found by knocking with one’s heel upon the spot, whence there is a sound; others by thrusting an iron rod into the earth’ (ibid 171). His companion, John Strachey, probed for stones by thrusting down his sword (Burl 1999: 52).
  In 1740 John Wood made a measured survey of the site but did not publish a plan. He drew attention to a couple of stones at Lower Tyning, apparently 3250 feet (991m) southwest of the SSW Circle, and also observed that the Cove, the Great Circle and the NE Circle are in alignment, as are the SSW Circle, the Great Circle and Hauteville’s Quoit (Wood 1765). Little of substance was added to the broad picture by a succession of commentators over the following 130 years. Of passing relevance is a further record of probing for buried stones (Seyer 1821) and an early account of their geological provenances (Lloyd Morgan 1887). A comprehensive measured plan, aided by further probing, as well as a detailed summary account of all the foregoing antiquarian records was published by Dymond in 1896a,b. More recent summaries include those of Grinsell (1956), Legg (1998) and Burl (1999, 2000).
  Possibly the most extraordinary fact to emerge from this past history is that there is no account of any speculative digging, let alone any formal excavation at Stanton Drew. The only reference to any finds, apart from the location of buried stones by probing, is from about 1666 when the author of A Fool’s Bolt soon shott at Stonage noted that ‘one of the stones being lately fallen, in the Pitt, in which it stood were found the crumbs of a man’s bones, and a round bell, like a large horse bell, with a skrewe as the stemme of it’ (Anon. 1666).
  The stone circles are located on a broad spur of land which slopes gently down to the flood-plain of the River Chew (Figures 1, 2). The SSW Circle is at the highest elevation, sited at the crest of a small knoll with the ground falling away in all directions. To the northeast, the Great Circle occupies a slight plateau in the general descent towards the river. Further downslope at the toe of the spur is the NE Circle, directly overlooking the floodplain. The river valley here is about 200m across and the Chew flows eastward along its northern side. Turning back at this point and looking upwards and south-westwards one is confronted by the rising ground, strewn with megaliths, with the church on the horizon, the Cove out of site beyond (Figure 2). The whole is underlain by Keuper Marl over which well drained reddish coarse loamy soils of the Bromsgrove soil association have developed (Soil Survey of England and Wales 1983).
  The incentive to undertake geophysical survey was provided by a change of ownership of the land in which the three stone circles stood. It was felt that a better understanding of the monuments was required, not only to serve public and academic interests, but to inform a process of improved access and site management then being negotiated with the new landowner, Mr Richard Young. The potential of geophysical survey at Stanton Drew had already been recognised as an obvious corollary of work undertaken at Avebury (Ucko et al. 1991) and in the Stonehenge area (David & Payne 1997). Independently, such a survey had also been included in a project design for a re-assessment of the site submitted to English Heritage by the Avon Archaeological Unit (Young 1996).
Mapping by magnetometry – the Great Circle
The obvious preliminary target of geophysical survey was the main field, known as Stone Close, containing the Great Circle itself, the NE Circle and the ‘avenues’. The technique of first choice was magnetometer survey, using Geoscan fluxgate gradiometers. These allow rapid ground coverage and respond to a wide range of buried features, providing a valuable impression of archaeological potential. In favourable conditions, with soils of high magnetic susceptibility and where extraneous magnetic disturbance is not too great, such surveys are capable of mapping buried features in great detail and clarity. Even in less than ideal conditions, magnetic survey can usually provide important information which allows the more focused application of other methods.
  Significant magnetic enhancement of soil is most common over occupation and industrial sites, where repetitive burning has taken place in antiquity. Ceremonial sites such as stone circles do not fall into this category, however, and sub-surface features may be both slight and very weakly magnetised. Buried stones, or the emplacements of former megaliths, may be undetectable. Taking all these factors into account, as well as the unknown level of magnetic interference, the magnetometer survey was begun with only modest expectations. As the magnetic response was expected to be slight, the magnetometers were deliberately held as close to the ground surface as possible to try and maximise the recognition of weaker anomalies. Relatively few magnetometer surveys seem to have been undertaken over Keuper Marl which does not have a very high magnetic susceptibility (see below). However, a previous magnetometer survey, conducted on the north side of the village in advance of developing a recreation field, showed that local soil conditions were suitable for this type of survey, capable in this case of at least locating buried ditches just 50m north of the Cove (Hale 1996).
  The location of the 1997 survey grid is shown in Figure 1. The survey took place during early September, the beginning of autumn in England. Instrument traverses were made at 1.0m intervals across the grid, with readings logged at 0.25m intervals. The resulting data is presented here as a greyscale image in Figure 4 in which exaggerated responses from surface iron objects have been minimised. Despite the magnetic disturbance from the surrounding fences and from a considerable scatter of ferrous debris throughout the field, it was immediately apparent, after the first day’s fieldwork, that a pattern of concentric rings was faintly discernible within the stones marking the Great Circle, and that the stones were themselves partly encircled by a much broader anomaly. The anomalies were mostly very slight and to begin with were not credited with significance when first viewed as partial images during the fieldwork. It was only at the end of the day when the entire dataset was assembled into a single image that the patterning and its significance at once became apparent. The survey was then extended into adjacent fields to the north, and north-eastwards onto the flood-plain (Figure 1).
  The fluxgate gradiometer data (Figure 4) are dominated by the pattern of anomalies concentric with the Great Circle. The outermost of these, with a width of about 7m, is caused by an encircling ditch. Over much of its course this ditch anomaly, with a magnetic strength of only ~1.25nT, is barely distinguishable from the general level of magnetic ‘noise’ in the field. In the north-east sector of its circuit there is an apparent gap of some 50m, with – perhaps – a second and smaller gap opposite this to the south-west. The anomaly is at its strongest ~3.75nT in the portion immediately north of the main gap. Within the ditch circuit the positions of the stones of the Great Circle that impeded the survey are indicated by blank areas (absence of data) in the greyscale plot. Within the stone circle are the weak traces of nine concentric rings of anomalies. The magnetic strength of these again barely exceeds background variation; their individual significance is owed to the recognition of the broader pattern. This is discernible only in the northern two-thirds of the Great Circle, fading away entirely in the southern portion. This differential visibility seems in some way to be related to the former field boundaries that once crossed the circle. The latter were mapped by Musgrave (1719) and by Stukeley (Figure 3) but

Figure 4.  Greyscale plot of fluxgate gradiometer data for Stone Close Field (the Great Circle).
  
were both removed by the time of Dymond’s survey
(1896 a, b).
  In order to try and achieve a better definition of the anomalies within the Great Circle, part of the area was resurveyed with a Scintrex Smartmag SM4 caesium magnetometer (Figure 5). At that time this instrument had only recently become available in the UK and its application at Stanton Drew formed part of a wider assessment by the Ancient
  

Figure 5.  Scintrex Smartmag SM4 in use at Stanton Drew 1997.
Monuments Laboratory of the relative performance of various caesium magnetometers on a number of sites in England (Cole et al 1999). The SM4 has a sensitivity of approximately 0.01 nanotesla (nT) compared to about 0.5nT of the Geoscan fluxgate instrument and it was hoped that this might allow the generation of a more detailed and complete image of the newly observed ring features. Most of the circle (Figure 1) was therefore surveyed with the Scintrex instrument during 22-23 October using the gradiometer configuration and a sample interval of 1.0m x 0.125m.
  The caesium magnetometer survey (Figure 6i), with its increased sensitivity and density of sampling interval, has allowed a more detailed examination of anomalies within the Great Circle. The diameter of the smallest circle is approximately 19.5m, whilst that of the outermost is about 92m. A mathematical circle-fitting exercise (Table 1) suggests that the inner circles are spaced more narrowly apart (at approximately 3.0m intervals) than the outer ones (about 5.0m apart). In the caesium survey each of the nine inner rings is seen more clearly to be composed of individual anomalies, although their separate identity is still difficult to discern, mostly blurred into indistinct arcs of variable continuity and intensity of definition. Clarity is further obscured by the overlay of irrelevant magnetic noise from ferrous debris in the soil. Significant individual anomalies are most clearly defined in the NW side of the outermost ring and it is probable that these are responses to pits. It follows as a reasonable assumption that all nine rings are therefore likely to be pit circles. Where sequences of individual pits can be distinguished, as in the outermost ring, it would appear that these are about 1.4m in diameter, with their centres spaced about 2.5m apart. Sizes and spacings are perhaps of a similar order in the remaining rings but the images are insufficiently distinct to be certain. The anomaly strength varies mostly between ~0.8-1.2nT, although the response from some pits is less than 0.5nT.
Table 1.  Parameters of the computed least mean squares circles fitted to the post hole anomalies and standing stones for the Great Circle and South-South-West circles. The columns specify the centre position (relative to the Ordnance Survey National Grid), radius and root mean square fitting error for each circle.
Centre Position (m)Radius (m)RMS Error (m)CircleEastingNorthingGreat Circle 1359,994.90163,275.009.830.992359,994.73163,274.8014.171.033359,994.88163,274.9018.961.024359,994.80163,275.1722.201.005359,994.72163,275.1526.121.136359,994.74163,275.1530.950.987359,994.73163,275.2735.250.988359,995.10163,275.2139.971.039359,994.82163,275.1945.981.01Stones359,994.62163,275.5556.441.09SSW Circle 1359,922.34163,071.925.250.102359,922.42163,071.888.540.333359,922.36163,072.3412.330.67Stones359922.25163071.7520.830.55
Figure 6.  a: Greyscale plot of caesium gradiometer data for the Great Circle; b: GPR amplitude ‘timeslice’, from a two-way travel time window of 30-32 ns, for the 30m x 30m area indicated within the Great Circle.
  Apart from the pit circles, there are a number of other magnetic anomalies indicative of possibly important features (Figure 7). In the central area of the circles is a cluster of anomalies most of which are characteristic of ferrous objects or ‘noise’. Amongst these, however, are at least two which have characteristics more suggestive of pits. Their magnetic strength (~7.5nT) is considerably greater than for the pits in the circles, and they appear to be rather larger, about two metres across. One is at or near the geometric centre of the monument. Despite an apparent lack of excavation at the site it would hardly be surprising had not some digging taken place at this, perhaps the most obvious, spot to attract the curious. If they are not due to historical diggings, or fires (or both), the two more substantial anomalies may represent a genuine component of the prehistoric site. This may also be the case for a number of other anomalies (as indicated in Figure 7), although none of these have the added significance of an obviously relevant geometric placement with respect to the circles. Three such anomalies, also possibly pits, lie close to the gap in the encircling ditch in the general proximity of the ‘avenue’ stones there.

Figure 7.  Interpretation of magnetic anomalies in Stone Close Field.
The South-South-West Circle
The SSW circle was surveyed by magnetometry and earth resistance in June 2000. The stone circuit appears to be incomplete, with gaps, and has a present total of 12 visible stones, all fallen and with at least two probably being fragments from adjacent monoliths. It has been estimated that there may once have been about 12 complete stones (Dymond 1896b; Grinsell 1956). One partially buried stone (or two stones) near the centre were not recorded until relatively recently (Grinsell 1956). The circle is now freed of its overlying field boundaries as well as orchard trees and is contained within a small triangular enclosure of pasture. Beyond the circle, about 68m north-east of its centre, a stone in a field boundary has been plotted by the Ordnance Survey.
  A high resolution fluxgate gradiometer survey, with a sample interval of 0.25m x 0.25m, was undertaken across this enclosed area and was extended to include the adjacent ground in the field immediately to the south-west (Figure 1). The results are illustrated in Figure 8 and an interpretative plan is shown in Figure 10. The results appear at first sight to present little less than a scaled down version of those revealed previously within the Great Circle. Although the clarity of individual anomalies is again very imprecise, the realisation of the overall pattern of which they form a part is compulsive: three concentric rings of anomalies arranged within the stone circle. Unfortunately there is considerable peripheral magnetic disturbance from fences (south and east sides on Figure 8) which obscures the clear definition of any encircling feature such as a ditch; and likewise a scatter of ferrous material near the centre of the circle limits the
                              Figure 8.  a) Greyscale plot b) traceplot of fluxgate gradiometer data over the SSW identification of any central Circle.
feature or features.
  As suggested for their analogues in the Great Circle, the likelihood is that the anomalies that comprise the rings are caused by the magnetically enhanced fillings of pits. Such pits may or may not have held posts (or even stones), and the presence of burnt materials must also be considered a possibility. The anomalies vary both in size and magnetic strength: the larger pits, predominantly in the outer circle are about 2m across and have a maximum magnetic intensity of ~5.0nT; the remainder, where these can be outlined with any accuracy at all, are about half the size and have a magnetic intensity of <~2.0nT.
circles, this one seems to be a true circle, but of uncertain diameter – 44.2m (145 feet:
  
Figure 10.  Interpretation of geophysical anomalies at the SSW Circle.
Dymond 1896b; Burl 2000) or perhaps less (43-44m: Grinsell 1956). Our own measurements suggest a diameter of ~41.5m and that the eccentricity is much less pronounced than implied by the OS map, all elements sharing a centre within about 0.55m. Given this uncertainty, as well as that concerning the exact number and placement of original stones, it is at present more than usually difficult to determine relationships amongst the components of this monument.
Other magnetic results
The 1997 fluxgate magnetometer survey of Stone Close Field included the NE Circle and within this located a central arrangement of four pit-like anomalies. These are sited as if at the corners of a 6m-sided square which, strikingly, shares the same orientation as the four pairs of stones that comprise the surrounding circle. The two eastern pits are the better defined (~5nT) and have diameters of 2.00-2.5m, and it may be assumed that the other pair are of similar dimensions. Less distinct, are a pair of smaller anomalies (~2nT) that lie, 4m apart, astride the east-west axis of the settings, between the easternmost pit pair and the easternmost stone pair. These anomalies may also be caused by pits, or even pairs of pits, adding an emphasis to the east-west axis of the circle and its components.
  Elsewhere in Stone Close there was considerable magnetic interference at the perimeters of the field caused by boundary fences, and the occasional presence of intense magnetic anomalies derived from ferrous debris. Once such concentration, lying about 20m south-west of the centre of the Great Circle coincides with a large and distinct depression in the ground surface. This is close to the intersection of two former field boundaries and is likely to be the site of the removal of a very large old elm in 1963 which ‘caused a major disturbance in the central area where its presence had certainly destroyed any archaeological subsoil features that may have been there’ (Tratman 1966: 42). Isolated trees can act a focus for ferrous debris and, once removed, the hollows they leave can become convenient dumping areas. Although the demise of the elm has indeed created a very substantial disturbance, this would seem to be well offcentre. Fortunately this and other such disturbances have not detracted from the recognition of the much weaker and more subtle patterning arising from the archaeological features.
  The survey was extended eastwards of Stone Close onto the flood plain, in order to investigate the immediate area into which any extensions of the ‘avenues’ might be expected to be found. Unfortunately this area was shown to be much disturbed by modern intrusions. A sewer main runs north-south and at least two other pipes or drains were located. A very large area of magnetic interference is present at the northern edge of the survey area caused by the infilling of a former pond or spring with agricultural debris (Richard Young pers. comm). The magnetometer was used to ‘scan’ (Clark 1996) more widely in this area and further afield on the flood plain, but no anomalies of significance were detected. Such scanning is of limited value in these conditions, however, and the possible presence of important elements of the monument complex here cannot therefore be discounted.
Results from other instruments
Earth resistance survey was first attempted at Stanton Drew in 1961 when Professor LS Palmer began a survey of the Great Circle. Ill-health prevented its completion, however, and the data was subsequently declared ‘essentially negative’ by the Physics Department of University of Bristol (Tratman 1966: 40). Following the initial results of the magnetometer survey in Stone Close two sample areas were surveyed by earth resistance in September 1997 to provide comparative data and re-assess the potential for this method at the site. A Geoscan RM15 resistance meter was used, applying a Twin Electrode (Twin Probe) configuration with a 0.5m mobile probe spacing; readings were taken at 1.0m intervals. The results were disappointing and there appears to be no correlation with the magnetic data in either survey area. The reason must be that the moisture content of the archaeological features does not contrast sufficiently with that of their surroundings. The variation that was detected is probably linked to spatially variable weathering of the underlying Keuper Marl. It seems that the depth to solid rock varies considerably across Stone Close: in some places the subsoil, consisting of unconsolidated rather sandy loam, is over 2m in depth, whilst in other places the consolidated bedrock is much closer to the surface (Richard Young pers comm). In other places an iron pan formation 5-15 cm thick has been observed at a depth of about 30 cm (Tratman 1966). A working hypothesis is therefore that the background resistance is predominantly influenced by underlying geomorphology overlain in places by the very nearsurface effects of livestock and agricultural activities. Between these two extremes the archaeological features are too subtle to be detectable – at least in the soil moisture conditions prevailing at the time of the survey.
  Undeterred, a third earth resistance survey was conducted in June 2000 of an area 30m x 52m aligned over the western perimeter of the Great Circle, using two mobile probe spacings (0.5m and 1.0m) to explore both shallow and deeper responses, as well as a narrower sampling interval (0.5m x 0.5m and 0.5m x 1.0m, respectively). The results were again disappointing. The ditch was not detectable in its known position, nor were the outer pit circles.
  An earth resistance survey over the SSW circle was more successful (Figure 9). It was conducted with a Geoscan RM15 metre and PA5 probe array using the Twin Electrode (or Twin Probe) configuration, and mobile electrode separations of 0.5m and 1.0m, for shallow and deeper penetration respectively. Sample densities were 0.5m x 0.5m for the 0.5m electrode separation, and 0.5m x 1.0m for the 1.0m electrode separation. The most striking result of this survey is the detection of a partial circuit of raised resistance outside the southern and western half of the stone circle. Stones 5-8 are seen to lie just within the inside edge of this anomaly which is very approximately 3-4m wide. It has been detected clearly in both the shallow and deeper sets of readings and is therefore not caused by a superficial feature. To the north-west and south-east it is undetectable where the field boundaries again constrain the survey coverage and interpose noisy data. Readings are generally higher along the northern wall and for a distance of some 15m into the circle with two unexplained foci well outside the circuit of stones. These latter anomalies may be responses to buried stones or perhaps to areas of locally more consolidated subsoil or bedrock. Along the eastern wall readings are relatively lower, but there is a marked focus of high readings to the east of Stones 1-2, suggestive of a buried stone.
  Interpretation of the outer ring of raised resistance is vexing as it contradicts the otherwise instinctive feeling that the enclosing feature ought to be a ditch. Instead, the higher readings imply locally drier sub-surface conditions, as might be found over walling, rubble or bank material. A relatively coarse ditch filling could provide the observed response; or the latter could be a manifestation of an unusual link between seasonality, capillary action and texture (eg Clark 1996: 51). Unfortunately, the magnetic data here are equivocal: an indefinite magnetic anomaly has been noted around part of the north-west sector of the circle (between stones 7-10), and also near stone 1, and might therefore be indicative of a ditch. However, no such anomaly is detectable, for instance near stone 6, or between stones 11 and 12.
  Neither set of data, earth resistance or magnetic, has detected a feature outside the northeast sector of the circle and it is difficult to avoid the surmise that there may be an outer gap or ‘entrance’ in this area. Within the stone circle the resistance response is rather ‘noisy’ with little convincing correlation between the scatter of very small-scale amorphous variation with the known pattern of magnetic anomalies.
  The June 2000 fieldwork also included a trial of Ground Penetrating Radar (GPR) to investigate the potential of this method to supplement the information from the preceding magnetometer surveys in Stone Close Field. GPR is capable of providing information on the depth of sub-surface features and, using ‘time slices’, the data from detailed surveys can be used to estimate the three-dimensional appearance of buried structures (Conyers & Goodman 1997; Goodman et al. 1995). At Stanton Drew, with a well drained soil, it seemed worth testing the ability of the method to characterise the pits, and perhaps to profile the ditch around the Great Circle. GPR ought also to be able to detect buried monoliths although this was not an objective on this occasion. The survey was conducted with a PulseEkko 1000 system and 450MHz centre frequency antenna over two areas, one of 50m x 30m over the NE circle and the other of 30m x 30m within the Great Circle (Figure 1). Data was collected from a series of parallel profiles separated by 0.5m established over each area. Individual traces along each profile were separated by 0.05m and recorded the amplitude of reflections through a 50ns time-window. The average velocity of the radar wavefront through the soil was calculated to be ~0.09m/ns.
  The results from the NE Circle failed to reveal any significant anomalies related, for instance, to the central arrangement of pits. The GPR transects across the magnetic anomaly encircling the Great Circle were also disappointing and did not succeed in profiling the ditch. However, the survey within the circle proved a little more successful. Anomalies are most distinct, even seeming to discriminate a series of individual pits, within the 30 to 32ns time-slice, indicating an equivalent depth of ~1.4m from the ground surface (Figure 6ii). The cause of these reflections may be compacted sediment or perhaps stone material at or near the base of the pits.
Discussion
The main findings of these surveys can be briefly summarised as follows. The Great Circle has been shown to be enclosed within a substantial ditch 5m-7m wide and with an outer diameter of about 136m, breached to the north-east by a large (50m) gap. Within the circuit of stones are nine concentric rings of magnetic anomalies interpreted as pits. The diameters of the inner and outer rings are about 19m and 92m respectively. There are a number of additional isolated anomalies, most notably at the centre of the circles where further pits may survive alongside later disturbances. The NE Circle has at its centre a symmetrical arrangement of four anomalies aligned with the four opposed pairs of stones that make up the circle. Subsidiary anomalies seem to impose an EW axis on the arrangement. The SSW Circle has also been shown to be a complex monument, with a slightly eccentric internal pattern of three concentric rings of magnetic anomalies, the whole being partially encircled by a ditch or possibly a remnant bank.
  It seems almost inescapable, now, that the Great Circle at Stanton Drew must be a circlehenge, one of a select group of stone circles contained within an encircling earthwork of inner ditch and outer bank interrupted by one or more gaps or entrances (Burl 2000: 284292). At Stanton Drew this arrangement is realised on a scale only exceeded at Avebury (Wiltshire), the Devils Quoits (Oxfordshire) and the Ring of Brodgar (Orkney). What makes the Great Circle unique above even these, and Stonehenge itself, is the vast array of multiple pit rings within it.
  The magnetic anomalies that signify the presence of these pits within the three circles deserve further comment. Our interpretation of them as such is based on the characteristic magnetic signature of pits, together with the inference allowed by the fact that such features recur so frequently within excavated henges and stone circles (Gibson 1994). Moreover, the evidence from excavations at sites such as Stonehenge, Durrington Walls, Woodhenge, The Sanctuary and Mount Pleasant strongly implies that, as at these famous sites, the pits at Stanton Drew may also once have held timber uprights (Gibson 1994, 1998). Whilst the magnetic evidence at Stanton Drew cannot certainly distinguish post-pits from, say, hearths or other types of pits, the likelihood that the foundations of a wooden structure are represented cannot easily be dismissed. The magnetic enhancement might have been caused by the burning of posts in situ, raising the magnetic susceptibility of their surrounding soils, or, in an explanation we are tempted to favour here, may result from the accumulation of biogenic magnetite in the post pipes. Certain soil bacteria, termed magnetotactic because they grow crystals of pure magnetite within their bodies, are known to feed on rotting wood, leading to the formation of concentrations of biogenic magnetite long after the wood itself has decayed (Fassbinder et al. 1990). We wonder whether it was such bacteria, attracted to the decaying timbers at Stanton Drew, that concentrated magnetite in their post-holes, locally raising magnetic susceptibility and allowing their detection as magnetic anomalies. Whilst such magnetic enhancement of soil has been demonstrated (Fassbinder & Stanjek 1993) it has not yet been shown to be a widespread contributor to the magnetic detection of archaeological features in the UK. It remains only hypothetical at Stanton Drew until soil samples can be obtained from the pit fillings so that mineral magnetic analysis can establish the actual enhancement mechanism(s) concerned.
  On the assumption that post-holes are indeed represented, then much speculation could follow on the nature of the monument they identify – on its engineering, architecture, associations, orientations, ritual use, social and economic implications and so on. Unfortunately the geophysical evidence, as we have seen, is too imprecise to endorse any such developed interpretations. The GPR data suggest that some of the pits, at least, may be well over a metre deep and this should not be surprising if they did once hold posts. For the time being we can only estimate the presence of some 400 or more large pits in the Great Circle, arranged in circles. Our geometrical analysis suggest that the circles have a common centre. Further geometric embellishment is hinted at by faint suggestions of radial patterning, with perhaps an aisle or corridor, just imaginable in the plots, leading outwards from the centre to the north-west (Figure 7).
  However, a cautionary comparison needs to be drawn between the magnetic anomalies obtained over unexcavated Aubrey Holes at Stonehenge (David & Payne 1997: 78, fig 2) and those within the circles at Stanton Drew. Whilst the former may once have held posts, this remains a debated interpretation (Cleal et al. 1995: 102) and the magnetic enhancement may instead be linked with the undisputed use of many of the Aubrey Holes for the placement of cremation deposits. If not pits (of various possible functions), or perhaps hearths, some of the anomalies in the SSW and NE Circles at Stanton Drew might be related to destructive phases where burning took place. One possibility, already referred to, is that posts might have been burnt; a further possibility is that stones may, at a much later date, as at Avebury, have been burnt and broken up. However, the latter seems a highly unlikely explanation as there is no physical or documentary evidence for the treatment of stones in this way at Stanton Drew; they may have been broken with sledge-hammers as suggested by Aubrey and Musgrave, or buried, as recounted by Stukeley, but not burnt.
  The geophysical evidence might be expected to offer insights into phasing but the predominant concentric patterning at all three stone circles precludes any useful overlapping of anomalies – an equal difficulty for the interpretation of equivalent excavated features. The geophysical evidence cannot help determine even the basic sequence between, say, the lithic and the presumed timber constituents of the Great Circle. It is worth commenting on the lack of geophysical evidence for any bank associated with the henge ditch. This absence is not surprising as banks are rarely, if ever, distinguishable as magnetic anomalies. At Stanton Drew it seems possible that the bank, mostly composed of a sandy subsoil, was soon degraded by time and cultivation. It may even have been deliberately levelled (Burl 2000: 149). Today, as in the times of John Aubrey and William Stukeley, there is no topographic expression of either bank or ditch; the latter must have remained open sufficiently long for the development of the weak magnetic enhancement apparent today, but possibly not for long thereafter. The soils at Stanton Drew, mostly stone-free and poorly consolidated, may help account both for the ease with which former earthworks diminished over time and for the instability of the megaliths, so many of which have been toppled, buried or partially submerged. Such soils would incidentally also have been well suited to the digging of pits – not an inconsiderable factor given the seemingly enormous number of these within the stone circles. The evidence for phasing, although not sequence, is more suggestive for the SSW Circle where the internal pit circles may be slightly eccentric to the stone circuit.
Conclusions
These geophysical surveys have, at a glance so to speak, completely transformed the perception of the Stanton Drew complex. They are a further demonstration, if any were needed, of the astonishingly powerful capacity of non-destructive methods to enhance archaeological knowledge. The geophysical results by themselves are relatively modest – most of the anomalies are ill-defined, obscured and incomplete – yet these fugitive traces have allowed the recognition of grander designs which have placed the site amongst the most remarkable prehistoric monuments of Europe. The appeal of the new findings is magnified by the integration of a seemingly invisible and certainly unsuspected phase of grandiose construction within a hitherto somewhat under-rated aggregation of dilapidated megalithic monuments.
  Now that more is known about the response of different instruments on this terrain, future survey needs to be extended further afield, both over available higher ground, and along the valley floor (Young 1996). Detailed topographic survey ought to be undertaken to examine and analyse the exact relationships between the geophysical anomalies, the stone circles, and their physical settings with greater precision.
Acknowledgements
The 1997 survey was commissioned by Brian Davison, then the regional Inspector of Ancient Monuments, and Jon Humble at that time acting Assistant Inspector of Ancient Monuments for the area. The potential of the site for geophysical exploration was previously recognised, however, not least by Andrew Young, then of the Avon Archaeological Unit, who recommended such survey in a project design of 1996, supported by Professor Richard Harrison of the Department of Archaeology at Bristol University (Young 1996).
Thanks are owed to David Field for discussion and searching out plans for us. We are especially grateful to the landowner, Mr Richard Young, for allowing the survey to take place. We were scarcely more prepared for the furore of press and public interest that followed the announcement of the discoveries in the Great Circle, than were Mr Young and his family, and other village residents. We would like to thank them all for their forbearance.
  
Bibliography
ANON. 1666. A Fool’s Bolt soon shott at Stonage, reprinted in Hearne, T., Langtoft’s Chronicle, 1725, ii: 506-10.
AVELING, E. 1997. Magnetic trace of a giant henge. Nature 390: 232-3.
BURL, A. 1999. Great Stone Circles, New Haven and London: Yale University Press: 47-63.
–2000. The Stone Circles of Britain, Ireland and Brittany, New Haven and London: Yale University Press.
CLARK, A. J. 1996. Seeing Beneath The Soil, 2nd edition, London: Batsford.
CLEAL, R., K. WALKER & R. MONTAGUE. 1995.
Stonehenge In Its Landscape: Twentieth Century
Excavations, English Heritage Archaeological Report 10, London.
COLE, M., A. DAVID, J. FASSBINDER, N. LINFORD, P. LINFORD & A. PAYNE. 1999. Comparative high resolution caesium vapour and fluxgate gradiometer survey at a range of archaeological sites in England. In J. W. E. Fassbinder and W. E. Irlinger (eds) Archaeological Prospection, Arbeitshefte des Bayerischen Landesamtes Fr Denkmalpflege, Band 108. 22-23.
CONYERS, L. B. & D. GOODMAN. 1997. Ground Penetrating Radar: An Introduction for Archaeologists. Altamira Press.
DAVID, A. 1998a. Stanton Drew: new light on a megalithic monument. Minerva 9 (2): 6-7.
–1998b. Stanton Drew, PAST, The Newsletter of the Prehistoric Society No 28, 1-3.
DAVID, A. & A. PAYNE. 1997. Geophysical surveys within the Stonehenge landscape: a review of past endeavour and future potential. Proceedings of the British Academy 92: 73-113.
DYMOND, C. W. 1896a. Stanton Drew, Bristol.
–1896b. The Ancient Remains at Stanton Drew in the County of Somerset.
FASSBINDER, J. W. E., H. STANJEK & H. VALI. 1990. Occurrence of magnetite bacteria in soil. Nature 343: 161-163.
FASSBINDER, J. W. E. & H. STANJEK. 1993. Occurrence of bacterial magnetite in soils from archaeological sites. Archaeologia Polona 31: 117-128.
FOWLES, J, & R. LEGG. (eds) 1980, 1982. John Aubrey’s Monumenta Britannica, parts 1-2,3, Sherborne.
GIBSON, A. 1994. Excavations at the Sarn-y-bryn-caled cursus complex, Welshpool, Powys, and the timber circles of Great Britain and Ireland. Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society 60: 143-223.
–1998. Stonehenge and the Timber Circles of Great Britain and Europe. Tempus, Stroud.
GOODMAN, D., Y. NISHIMURA & J.D. ROGERS. 1995. GPR Time slices in archaeological prospection. Archaeological Prospection 2: 85-89.
GRINSELL, L. V. 1956. Stanton Drew Stone Circles. Somerset, London.
HALE, D. N. 1996. A geophysical survey on a proposed recreation field, Stanton Drew, Somerset. Geoquest Associates, unpublished report.
LEGG, R. 1998. Stanton Drew, Great Western Temple, Wincanton. Wincanton Press.
LLOYD-MORGAN, C., 1887, The Stones of Stanton
Drew: their source and origin. Proceedings of the Somerset Archaeological and Natural History Society 33: 37-50.
MUSGRAVE, W. 1719. Antiquitates Britanno-Belgicae vol i.
PITTS, M. 2001. Hengeworld, 2nd edition, London: Arrow.
SEYER, S. 1821. History of Bristol, i: 92-101.
STUKELEY, W. 1776. Itinerarium Curiosum. Centuria 2, London.
TRATMAN, E. K. 1966. Investigations at Stanton Drew stone circles, Somerset. Proceedings of the University of Bristol Spelaeological Society 11.1, 1965-6: 40-2.
UCKO, P. J., M. HUNTER, A. CLARK & A. DAVID. 1991.
Avebury Reconsidered; from the 1660s to the 1990s. London: Unwin Hyman.
WOOD, J. 1765. An essay Towards a Description of Bath. 3rd edition. W. Frederick.
WHITTLE, A. 1997. Sacred Mound Holy Rings. Oxbow Monograph 74, Oxford.
YOUNG, A. 1996. Stanton Drew N. E. Somerset, a Third Millennium bc Megalithic Complex: Project Design for an Archaeological Research Project. Avon Archaeological Unit, Bristol, Dec 1996. Unpublished.
A rival to Stonehenge?
  
Andrew David, Mark Cole, Tim Horsley, Neil Linford, Paul Linford, Louise Martin
  
342
  
341
  

  
341
  
