158	ANTIQUITY
  
means in terms of society forms one of the most provocative chapters of this volume. But just how far the ripples of interpretation should spread outwards from an excavation project is open to question; the apparent 'certainties' of a factual report do not mean that the subsequent social analysis is necessarily on a firm foundation.
  The chapter layout is not one that the reviewer would himself have chosen. The constant insertion of specialist reports, either as paragraphs, appendices or chapters, detracts from the flow of description; a resumé of the results within the text would have kept the continuity of the prose, with the supporting data printed at the end (in no sense lessening their importance). The use of different numerical notations for small finds in the chapters on the excavation and artifacts from Quanterness is also confusing ; the large piece of pottery (small find 323) lying with the burial in Pit A (p. 59)—a potentially interesting sherd—cannot be found in the subsequent catalogue or discussion.
  The drawings are clear and helpful, though whether the lavish use of fold-outs is justified or wise is open to question; Fig. 13 had not been tipped-in to the reviewer's copy. The printing of what were fine photographs is in some cases dark and grainy; Pl. xxiiib appears to be upside down.
  Such criticism cannot detract from the importance of the meticulous excavation and recording of the Quanterness deposits in what were exceedingly diffcult conditions; the results have indeed added new dimensions to the study of this period in
Orkney.	GRAHAM RITCHIE
Royal Commission on Historical Monuments (England): Stonehenge and its environs: monuments and land use. Edinburgh, the University Press, 1979. 39 pp., 16 figs., 27 pls., 3 folding maps in pocket.
The title of this excellent and informative study deliberately echoes that of Sir Richard Colt Hoare's map of the same area (some 13 square miles), and is concerned with the effect of altering land use since its publication in 1812, and since Stukeley's records of the 1720s. It forms, in fact, the argument for the firm recommendation that the area described should be 'designated an Archaeological Area' in the terms now possible under the 1979 Act, 'with critical attention paid to the proper management of the monuments'. All of us will hope that this overdue measure will be put into practice as soon as possible.
  Concisely and clearly the survey provides us with the latest statement on the Stonehenge sequence by Richard Atkinson, with full supporting radiocarbon dates ; summaries of all excavations in the area since the publication of the 1950s gazetteer to VCH Wilts Vol I, and some 80 additional barrows identified from air photographs; and important comments on the dating of some at least of the 'Celtic' field systems and boundary ditches to the second millennium BC. The illustrations are to the high standard one expects from the Commission, and if one finds it unusual to see, not the Stationery Offce, but the Edinburgh University Press imprint, one is not in these circumstances surprised at the characteristic elegance of the book's production.
STUART PIGGOTT
Paul Cartledge : Sparta and Lakonia, a regional history 1300—362 BC. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1979. 425 pp., 19 figs. &0.50.
This book is in four parts. The first gives a useful account of the boundaries, geology, and climate of Laconia (with Messenia), noting the changes and fluctuations so far detected, and concludes with a survey of the not very revealing remains earlier than about 1300 BC. The second and longest part deals with the next eight centuries, during which the Spartans established their power and for which much of the evidence is archaeological. Here Cartledge shows in general a scepticism that does him credit, believing it extremely doubtful that it will ever be possible to write a wholly convincing narrative or systematic account of Greek history before c. 550 (p. 57). He might, though, have been more sceptical about the coming of the 'Dorians' to Sparta (pp. 87—98). Between c. 1050 and c. 950 there is an archaeological vacuum, and after it the new style of pottery is very different from that before, but related to the contemporary styles of Western Greece, and so the Dorians must have arrived c. 950 by way of Western Greece: yet they found older inhabitants already around, who became the Perioeci and Helots of historical times. It would be, I think, more logical to conclude, since there is a vacuum for these older inhabitants too, either that the region of Sparta was more or less totally depopulated and the ancestors of the Perioeci and the Helots came in with those of the Spartans, or that with a hundred years missing continuous evolution in the style of pottery is possible. Besides, if the Spartan Dorians had been pastoralists from NorthWest Greece, they are not so likely to have picked up a pottery style on their way or kept it when in contact with settled and presumably more advanced neighbours after their arrival. Again on pottery, though the distribution of Laconian ware is wide (pp. 137 and 143), it also is thin and does not necessarily imply Laconian shippers (see JHS, 1979, 153—4). The third part of the book, on historical times till the destruction of Spartan power, is based
