Antiquity

	VOL. XV No. 60	DECEMBER 1941

The Sources of Geoffrey of Monmouth
Il. The Stonehenge Story by STUART PIGGOTT
1
N a previous paper in ANTIQUITY (September 1941) I indicated briefly the complexity of the interpretation of the jumbled myth, legend and fantasy contained in the Historia Regum Britanniae, and discussed the sources which seem likely to have been used by its unscrupulous author for those parts of the work which purport to deal with the pre-Roman ages of Britain. These sources appear in the main to have been a version of the Historia Britonum of Nennius and a collection of pedigrees of ruling houses of the Welsh Dark Ages ; a variety of other classical and Celtic material was laid under contribution for embellishments, but there was certainly nothing that could be connected, even indirectly, with any source earlier than that of the classical writers' accounts of the Roman conquest and occupation of Britain. Geoffrey's prehistory is in fact completely bogus, and while it may sometimes incorporate interesting fragments of early medieval history or legend, it bears no relation whatsoever to the period it professes to chronicle.
    On the other hand, in that part of the Historia allegedly treating post-Roman history, Geoffrey relates at some length a story dealing with the building of no less a prehistoric monument than Stonehenge itself. Now this story is on the face of it probably more fantastic than any other in the whole of his extensive series of legends : it is a tale of sheer magic, with so little apparent connexion with any possible events that it was for generations dismissed either as one of the flights of Geoffrey's fancy or as a folk-tale from a Celtic fairy-land. To the rationalist antiquaries of the nineteenth century the story of the bodily transportation under Merlin's direction of a great stone circle from the remote west to Salisbury Plain, could obviously be brushed aside with an Olympian assurance, and it was left, paradoxically, for the precise and exact determinations of science in our own day to announce, through the late Dr H. H. Thomas, that a large proportion of the Stonehenge stones had indeed been brought, if not from Ireland as Geoffrey's legend relates, at least from a hardly less surprising and remote district : West Wales. Furthermore there is evidence of their having formed part of a structure earlier than that in which they now find a place and perhaps before their transportation to the site of Stonehenge—they may represent in fact not merely the natural products of a distant quarry but the transportation and re-adaptation of a Welsh stone circle to a Wiltshire site.
    Now this correspondence between legend and fact is so remarkable that it can hardly be dismissed as mere coincidence. On the other hand, the assumption that there is a link between an event which took place between 2000 and 1500 B.C., and a legend first making its written appearance in A.D. 1136, obviously presents remarkable diffculties, and the lines of approach which I put forward must be regarded only as the most tentative and hypothetical outlines which the literary and the archaeological evidence, taken in conjunction, suggest.
    We may now turn to a fuller consideration of the facts available— on the literary side the details of Geoffrey's story, and on the archaeological, of the ' foreign stone ' element in Stonehenge. The story as given in the Historia (Bk. Vlll, 9—12), runs as follows. The Dark Ages ruler, Aurelius Ambrosius, wishing to erect a monument to commemorate those massacred by Hengist near Ambresbury, is advised to consult Vortigern's prophet, Merlin, who is to be found at the Fountain of the Galabes in the country of the Gewissae. Merlin advises him to send for the chorea gigantum que est in killarao monte hybernie, the stones of which had been brought from Africa and possessed magical healing powers. Ambrosius therefore makes a warlike expedition to Ireland, where he conquers the king Gillomanius and acquires the stones, which are then brought by Merlin's magic arts on to the ships, and thence transported to Salisbury Plain, where they are set up.
    The archaeological position with regard to the ' foreign stones at Stonehenge is briefly as follows. After various guesses as to their origin, some fairly near the truth, this was definitely established by Dr
H. H. Thomas in 1923.1 From petrological examination by microscopic sections he found that the only place where the stones were matched as a group was the Carn Meini region of the Presely Range in Pembrokeshire, where the various rhyolites and the unique spotted dolerite occur. The ' Altar Stone ' was found to be a sandstone either from the Cosheston beds near Milford Haven or the Senni beds of south Carmarthen and Brecknock. Subsequent research has shown that the Presely stones were also used to make axe-hammers of ' Beaker ' type which are found at widely scattered sites in Wales, and two polished axes have actually been identified as imports in northern Ireland.2This exploitation of igneous rocks for axes is of course a part of the widespread system of manufacture and trade in these commodities which petrological research is now beginning to establish on a firm footing,34and though in some measure it brings the Stonehenge episode into connexion with the general movements of trade of the period, this in no way minimizes the fantastic nature of the actual event. Mr W. F. Grimes, in a notable topographical study of the Welsh terrain,' comes to the conclusion that the most probable method of transport would be ' a land route [from Carn Meini] to a suitable point of embarkation ' in the Haverfordwest region, thence to Wiltshire by sea—either across the Bristol Channel to the Mendips and through the Frome Gap in the forest belt on to the chalk, or by sea round Land's End and thence up the Avon.
    It will be seen that the correspondence between the two elements, the legendary and the archaeological, are suffciently curious to be worth further discussion ; we have to consider the various means by which such a legend, ultimately based on the facts, could have found its way into Geoffrey's text. If we assume it to have been completely invented by him, we are of course thrown back on the pure coincidence theory, which I do not think tenable in the face of such exact and improbable similarities. But it might be argued that, as so often the case with an apparent ' folk-memory ', we are merely dealing with an aetiological myth, either invented by Geoffrey or taken by him from popular talk, to explain the presence on Salisbury Plain of a monument constructed of stones which appeared to be derived from a remote source, This, while possible, is not I think convincing. Twelfthcentury science was hardly suffciently advanced to question the presence of spotted dolerites in a cretaceous landscape, and while Wiltshiremen would know sarsens for the local rocks they were, the only popular theory to account for their origin by visitors seems to have been, that they were artificially made from a sort of Druidic cement.5 While the building itself might well be regarded as the work of giants or of wizardry, it would be unnecessary to invoke the transportation of its stones from afar—stones were just stones and might occur anywhere, and only their arrangement in an architectural manner as at Stonehenge would call for comment. In parenthesis I think it not unlikely that the absence of any early medieval records of other stone circles, including Avebury, is due to the fact that they were regarded as natural objects of the countryside, in which by a whim of the Creator the stones stood on end and in some sort of order.
    Unless then we have in Geoffrey's story an aetiological myth which (again by coincidence) hit on very nearly the true facts, we must examine other possible sources. Discursive reading and a retentive memory resulted in his filling his narrative with a mass of stories, allusions and reminiscences from the most diverse sources, some of which have been pointed out but many await identification. His secular reading included, as well as Nennius and Gildas, not only Livy, Virgil, Ovid and some minor Latin poets, but Apuleius ; he was familiar with geographers such as Solinus, Pomponius Mela and Strabo, and used the Origines of Isidore of Seville and probably Bede's De Natura Rerum as well as his Historia Ecclesiae, and the Jerome-Eusebius chronicle. 6But from none of these sources could he have obtained a Stonehenge legend, nor one which would suggest itself for adaptation in the way for instance in which he transferred Mela's nine virgins of the Isle of Sein to Avallon in his Vita Merlini. 7 It is of course far more diffcult to assess his debt to the popular stories which were the common property of the courts of medieval Europe and are exemplified by the collection in the Gesta Romanorum, or the French romances. In these stories Oriental and other exotic influences are often clearly present, and that Geoffrey's store of legendary matter was not confined to classical and the debated Celtic sources later to be mentioned is shown for instance by his knowledge of the story of Wayland. 8
    It is the Celtic sources to which we may turn with most hope. In my previous paper I summarized the arguments which have rendered baseless Geoffrey's claim to have translated (however freely) from the Welsh a book of Celtic history, but at the same time I endeavoured to show that he most probably used a book of early Welsh pedigrees for the construction of part of the Historia ; other than this it is diffcult to trace any evidence of his direct use of Old Welsh manuscript sources. But far more diffcult is to confirm or refute the indirect use he may have made of oral tradition or Welsh legends read and half forgotten. On this, the opinion of the scholars has been divided, but Prof. J. J. Parry has I think brought forward convincing evidence of Geoffrey's use, at all events in the Vita Merlini, of genuine sources in Welsh tradition and literature, 9 and the strong probability of an oral Welsh basis for the Prophecies of Merlin was well demonstrated by the late Enid Griffhs.1011 Such use is, on the face of it, probable, but it is in its very nature diffcult to analyse or to produce evidence amounting to exact proof, since much depends on stylistic criteria. And it is precisely on these equivocal and unsatisfactory grounds of style that I would suggest that the Stonehenge legend as recorded by Geoffrey bears a distinct amnity to Welsh tradition, and in particular to one story to which attention in this connexion was first directed, I believe, by Prof. O. T. Jones of Cambridge. ll
    One of the four tales which form the early nucleus of the medieval Welsh collection known, since Lady Charlotte Guest's translation, as the Mabinogion, is the story of Branwen, daughter of Llyr, in which there occurs the following episode, Bran the Blessed, having led an expedition to Ireland to avenge the wrongs done to his sister Branwen,

who is married to the Irish king Matholwch, is there wounded in battle and instructs his seven followers to cut off his head and take it to the White Hill in London by a specified route. These instructions for decapitation are carried out, and they then proceed with the head by way of Anglesey, where Branwen, who accompanied them, dies and is buried in the famous ' four-square grave on the banks of the Alaw ' . Thence, following Bran's instructions, they journey with the head to Harlech, where they hear news that Catuvellaunus is crowned king of England in London, and stay in Harlech seven years at an enchanted feast. At the end of this time they go to Gwales in Pembrokeshire, to a great hall overlooking the sea and with one door towards Cornwall and Aber Henfelen. There they remain eighty years, until they open the door towards the east and carry the head on the last stage of its journey to London, where it is buried ' with the face towards France to ward off foreign invasion.12
    It will be seen that the story of the transportation of that precious relic and palladium, the head of Bran Fendigaid, from Ireland to England bears a singular resemblance to our legend of Stonehenge. In both there is the initial expedition to Ireland, and a battle which results in the acquisition of a venerated object, in both the transportation to a southern English destination and its deposition there as a rallying-point of magic or funerary significance. In the story of Bran the stages of the journey are given in interesting detail ; the last haltingplace of the land journey through Wales is significantly described as looking across the Bristol Channel, and the next stage finds the head already in England—a sea-journey is the inevitable link, and the transport of the Presely stones comes immediately to the mind. If we have not once again found an accidental coincidence (and the coincidence of coincidences becomes in itself rather improbable) we seem to have some linking up of three things—the facts of the transportation of the Presely stones to Wiltshire, the Dark Ages tale of a magic talisman brought from Ireland through Pembrokeshire to southern England, and the story of the magic building of Stonehenge as recorded in the least reliable and most suspect chronicler of the Middle Ages. What attitude are we to adopt towards this awkward triad ?
    The resemblances between Geoffrey's story and that of Bran surely point to the possibility of his having derived the legend from a Celtic source, either from a manuscript, or, more likely, from an oral tradition in Wales. It does not seem likely that he adapted the actual
tale of Bran to fit Stonehenge, but both may derive from a common source. Bran's head might even be Stonehenge, and Geoffrey's version preserve a less corrupted story than that in the Mabinogion, or both may be distorted legends of the traffc along those ancient trade routes between Wessex, Wales and Ireland in which the Stonehenge episode takes so spectacular a place.
    There is I think some collateral evidence from the Historia to suggest that Geoffrey had some knowledge of the Bran or allied legends, in connexion with his stories of Vortigern and of Vortimer. The first, and no more than a possible connexion, relates to the former, whose death, as told by Geoffrey, was by burning in a tower, as prophesied by Merlin (set prius te infra turrim inclusum comburent, Bk. Vill, 1). This suggests a possible comparison with the story of the burning of Llassar Llaesgyfnewid and his wife in the Iron House as told by Bran to Matholwch, but I do not insist on a parallel which may be fortuitous. The second point deals with Vortimer, who in the Historia commands, on his deathbed, that his body should be placed in a great bronze monument at the port where the Saxons had landed, so that the sight of his tomb would drive the invaders back to their homeland— lussit piramidem fieri sibi aerseam locarique in portu quo saxones applicare solebant. Corpus uero suum Postquam defunctum foret sepeliri desuper ut uiso busto barbari retortis uelis in germaniam redirent. Dicebat enim neminem illorum audere propius accedere si etiam bustum ipsius aspicerent (Bk. VI, 14).
This is obviously similar in its sense to the burying of the head of Bran, and indeed it is linked with this, and with the twin dragons of Ambrosius related by Nennius, in the medieval Welsh Triad of the Closures and Disclosures of the Island. The Triads are suspect enough sources, and this one is presumably post-Galfridian, but the early authority for the other two items may be significant, and at all events it shows that the similarity in thought between the Bran and the Vortimer episodes had struck the Welsh compiler.
    It would be tempting to equate the Vortimer story with an aetiological legend invented to explain the ruins of the Roman monument which stood on the great cruciform foundation at Richborough, but the archaeological evidence shows that this structure, built c. A.D. 100, was destroyed about 280 and its materials utilized in building the stone fort on the site. 13 No remains would therefore exist to provide the basis for a legend originating in the Middle Ages, and the RomanoBritish source assumed to have been used by Nennius for the section dealing with Vortigern would hardly include legendary material from such an early date, even if we assume further that Geoffrey also had access to this or a similar source-book.
    It is however one thing to assume continuity of legendary oddments from Roman times into the Dark Ages, but quite another to carry a story back into prehistoric times. On the margins of prehistory we can identify such muddled references as that to the Belgic princes in the tale of Branwen itself, and, more accurately and explicitly, the important family relationships within the Catuvellaunian dynasties which are preserved in the early medieval Welsh pedigrees.14Cyril Fox has recently taken the matter a stage further, again in the very story of Branwen under discussion, and has pointed out how the Late Bronze Age trade in bronze cauldrons from Ireland to Wales is echoed in the conversation between Bran and Matholwch.15 This certainly implies, in surviving Welsh literature, a prehistoric stratum as early as the Late Bronze Age or the Early Iron Age, 16 yet such generalized references are something different from the sharply localized and specific account of the building of a particular monument that we find in Geoffrey's story of Stonehenge. In this is implied a continuity more than could exist in casual hearth-side talk and stones that had become fairy-tales. For a legend to have survived in recognizable form from the earlier Bronze Age to the earlier Middle Ages—nearly three thousand years at the most conservative reckoning—it must have been embodied in some set of traditions which were carefully preserved in as nearly as possible their pristine form, transmitted along a channel from which outside influences were excluded. Such traditions, such channels, can surely only be those afforded by a religion and a priesthood.
    Evidence for the existence of a certain continuity in religious ideas and ritual elements, usually connected with burials, from the Early Bronze Age at least until the Late Bronze Age, has been latent in the results of the archaeological research of the past few years, but it was left to Mr C. E. Stevens to bring matters to a head by his recent stimulating note on the Iron Age and Roman sacred sites at Frilford in Berkshire, in which he boldly claims a survival of Early Bronze Age cults into the period of the Roman Occupation of Britain.17 Briefly, he suggests a dual division of the native cults in the southern provinces of Roman Britain, represented on the one hand by the ' Romano-Celtic ' type of square temple, an introduction from Gaul that he would associate with the Belgae, and on the other, in the non-Belgic regions, a survival of the Early Bronze Age religious conventions bound up in the worship at circular temples of wood or stone or earthen banks Mr Kendrick's ' Henge Monuments which at the Frilford site fin expression in such a structure of Iron Age date, itself succeeded by a circular Roman building. Citing the abundant Roman material from such Bronze Age monuments as Stonehenge, Avebury, Arminghall and elsewhere, he argues for a persistence of their ritual employment during the Occupation.
    This most attractive thesis is worth developing at somewhat greater length, since it is obviously of first rate importance in our Stonehenge enquiry. The sum of archaeological information suggests that in the Early Bronze Age there existed three main inter-related types of circular ritual structures or temples—an open space delimited by a ditch with one or two opposed causeways (e.g. Gorsey Bigbury) ; a circle or analogous setting of free-standing stones or wooden posts either by itself (The Sanctuary) or with the enclosing ditch (Arminghall, Arbor Low), and lastly, circular timber structures probably roofed buildings (Woodhenge, The Sanctuary).18 Though indirectly associated with burials, as for instance the ritually sacrificed infant at Woodhenge, they are not funerary monuments, but during the Middle Bronze Age one sees a religious syncretism at work in which versions of all these structures appear intimately associated with burials. The famous timber monument of Bleasdale in Lancashire, and the post-structures within barrows such as those of South Wales recently excavated by Sir Cyril Fox,19 or the other examples known from Middle Bronze
Age sites from Yorkshire to Dorset, show one side of this tradition, and the stone circles or ritual ditches inside barrows equally widely distributed, another; and while no non-sepulchral temple in the ' Henge ' tradition is known at present in the Middle Bronze Age, it is improbable that none were built and that worship was confined to the ancient fanes. For in the Late Bronze Age we find the strength of the old tradition asserting itself in such diverse forms and widely distributed examples in both Lowland and Highland Britain as the • megalithic horseshoe setting within the Deverel barrow in Dorset, 20 Or the double-entrance ditch at the Loanhead of Daviot cemetery in Aberdeenshire, 21 so that the appearance of the Frilford temple in the Iron Age comes as the natural culmination of a long-established native tradition of religious architecture rather than as in any way an innovation. And it appears not merely as a product of a purely religious continuity ; the tradition owes its strength to the fact that the temple plan was itself a part of the heritage of the western European circular house complex, which took such firm root in Britain in the Early Bronze Age that it was still powerful enough to survive into the Iron Age in the face of the rectangular house-plan of the newcomers.2223 The Woodbury farmhouse and the Frilford temple are complementary expressions of the Bronze Age architectural tradition in its domestic and its ritual aspects.
    Mr Stevens quotes the casual finds of pottery and other objects on the famous Early Bronze Age ' henge ' sites as probably indicating a continuance of worship in Roman times. Maumbury Rings at Dorchester received, it must be admitted, scant respect from the conquerors, who turned it into an amphitheatre ; but at Stonehenge some structural addition or alteration seems actually to have been contemplated and partly carried out in late Iron Age or Roman times, when the Z and Y holes were dug around the already ruinous sarsen circle to hold stones or posts. The Stonehenge sequence is controversial, and attempts have even been made to claim it in its entirety for the Iron Age without entering into details here, an Early Bronze Age foundation, followed by a Middle Bronze Age (' Wessex Culture ') grandiose rebuilding, and finally the Iron Age work mentioned above seems the most probable sequence, and one that forcibly demonstrates the continuity of the religious traditions behind it. And now, at the dawn of
the Roman Conquest and of written history, we can no longer escape reference to those elusive figures, obviously by now troubling the reader's mind by their equivocal reputation, the Druids. Mr Stevens avoided mention of the ominous priesthood ; but such a body of legendary lore as they possessed, such countless verses as they memorized and taught to initiates, is an essential element in the religious continuity we have shown from the archaeological evidence to have existed, and if there were legends of the building of Stonehenge handed down to literate times it is these inheritors of a cult, acknowledged by themselves to be ancient and perhaps containing recognizable Bronze Age elements,24who are most likely to have been the medium of its transmission.
    We have no direct evidence of the nature of the Romano-Celtic religion as practised in the native sanctuaries in the west and south of England. An occasional dedication, such as that to Nodens at Lydney (though not in a native type of temple) gives us a glimpse of a native god later to become no less a legendary figure than King Lear, 25 and at Cerne, in Dorset, it seems probable that another rustic deity was assimilated to Hercules, perhaps under the influence of the Commodus cult.26 There is one entrancing glance, provided by Gildas and tantalizing alike in its brevity and its turgidity, of the gods of the immediately post-Roman period, the effgies of which, grotesque, stiff and savage, and more numerous than the gods of Egypt, he saw standing inside or outside the deserted cities—
. . . nec enumerant Patriae portenta ipsa diabolica paene numero Aegyptiaca vincentia, quorum nonnulla liniamentis adhuc deformibus intra vel extra deserta moenia solito more rigentia torvis vultibus intuemur—De Excidio, cap. IV.27
But he makes no reference to temples, and of these there is no mention until Saxon times when an alien series of religious cults had arrived to confuse the issue still further.
    Yet it is perhaps possible that the ancient native cults persisted in many regions little changed, and that some of the fana idolorum Pope Gregory in 601 cautioned Mellitus against destroying in England, advising rather their  were products of the old Bronze Age tradition. Mr G. M. Young has made the intriguing suggestion that the antiqua monumenta in locum ubi a ruricolis dicitur aet than holenstypbum mentioned in the bounds of Bedwyn parish (Wilts.) in 778 were really some form of pagan Saxon timber circle," or an open sacred fenced enclosure such as the fana idolorum cum septis quibus erant circumdata ritually profaned by Coifi in Yorkshires 0 and both would be as well explained by ' henges ' in the native Bronze Age tradition as -by an intrusive Saxon cult. In the mingling of pagan beliefs and religions in the Dark Ages we see flashes of the prehistoric rites in the gloom—St. Samson surprising the actors in a ritual drama at a menhir in Cornwa113i ; St. Kentigern being surprised by ingens larvatorum multitudo statura et visu horribilis engaged in some archaic ceremony, 32 perhaps allied to that terrible disguising as a bull-calf on the Kalends of January against which the Penitentials thunder in vain. 33 In the twelfth century even we find deus Helith hinted at as being, not so long previously, worshipped in Dorset.3 ' And behind and perhaps

    28 Bede, Hist. Eccles. 1, xxx. The only possible example of such re-consecration seems to be at Knowlton in Dorset, with a church as early as the 12th c. in a Bronze Age earthen circle (ANTIQUITY, XIII, 152—5). The site of Yspytty Cynfyn in Cardiganshire, often claimed as a church within a stone circle, has been discussed and discarded by Grimes (op. cit. supra, 21).
     29 Wilts. Arch. Mag., 1932, XLV, 525—7.
   30 Bede, o.p. cit. 11, xiii.
    31 The incident is described in the early 7th cent. life of St. Samson of DOI, cap.
XLV111 (Acta Sanctorum VI (July), 573—91 (Venice 1749), trans. by T. Taylor, S.P.C.K. 1925 ; cf. Hencken, Arch. of Cornwall, 1932, p. 214 ; Crawford in Custom is King, 1936, pp. 195—6).
    32 Joscelyn of Furness' Life of St. Kentigern (late 12th cent.), quoted by BaringGould and Fisher, Lives of the British Saints, 11, 238.
    33 e.g. that of Theodore of Canterbury (late 7th cent.) ; the practice had previously been denounced by the Council of Auxerre in the 6th cent. (Margaret Murray, The Witch Cult in Western Europe, 1921, p. 21).
    34 Walter of Coventry, Memoriale (Rolls Series, 1872), 1, 60 ; ANTIQUITY, 1932, VI, 214—6 ; 1938, Xll, 330.
involving all, the cult of the witches, wherein whatever weight we attach to the strictures of Dr Murray's critics, a very considerable element of prehistoric religion must lie. The streams of continuity must have been mixed, crossing and shifting and sometimes dying out completely, but in the early Dark Ages at least a strong element in myth and legend must have endured from prehistoric times, and possibly even a confused religious tradition may have persisted, so that the princeps sacerdotum idolatriae who, standing in tumulo excel$0 by the shore at Selsey reviled Wilfrid, emissary of the Roman church, 28 may have had some title to descent from those Druids who seven centuries before by the Menai had cursed the approaching forces of the Roman army. And no less a personage than St. Illtyd came of a family of magicians and prophets, presumably of a pre-christian religion.29
    To review the forgoing mosaic of suggestions : we have archaeological evidence of the continuity of use of a certain type of ritual structure or temple, with presumably an accompanying tradition of priestcraft and sacred legend, from the Early Bronze Age to the Roman Occupation, and what scraps of information we have do not preclude its even later survival into the pagan Dark Ages along with other elements of prehistoric cults. Such a continuity would provide a possible vehicle for the transmission of legend from an early period into literate times, and the fact that the legend under discussion relates to Stonehenge, a monument with evidence of constructional activity as late as the eve of the Roman period, increases our confidence in the probability of Geoffrey having derived his story from a fragment of Dark Ages legend originating in prehistoric times, and preserved in Welsh popular literature. There remains one point to be considered which may throw a little additional light on the reasons for the story's survival.
    The transport of the stones from Ireland is by Geoffrey assigned to the joint efforts of two shadowy figures, Merlin and Aurelius Ambrosius, and this association is worth examining. The personality of Merlin as we have it in the Historia is very dissimilar from that in Geoffrey's later work, the Vita Merlini, where he is in all essentials the Celtic prophetic madman of the woods who appears as Lailoken in Scottish, Suibhne in Irish and Merddyn in Welsh legend.30 But in
the Historia he is not only at one point directly identified or confused with Ambrosius himself (tunc ait merlinus qui et ambrosius dicebatur Bk. VI, 9), but his supernatural qualities, apart from the Stonehenge and the Arthurian episodes, seem introduced only on the one hand to reconcile Ambrosius with the Dragon Prophecy attributed to him by Nennius, and on the other to enable Geoffrey to insert his earlier Vaticinia Merlini into the text of his new book. He represents in fact merely a separate embodiment of the magical attributes of Ambrosius at which Nennius had hinted.
    Ambrosius is however a more substantial figure. His existence is vouched for independently by Gildas as well as by Nennius, both of whom agree in his patrician Roman lineage (typically improved by Geoffrey making him the son of the Emperor Constantine !) and he appears to be a Prince of Wessex, fighting against the Saxons and Vortigern, with Arthur as his dux bellorum. Geoffrey follows Nennius quite closely, and even the inserted episode of his coming from Brittany is not sheer invention, but utilizes an early legend known also to Gilla Coemgin, who translated the Historia Britonum into Irish in 1072.31But the introduction of the Stonehenge story is completely unrepresented in any source, and it remains to be seen whether Geoffrey's connexion of the event and the personage has any reason behind it. He is at pains to stress the Wessex connexions of Ambrosius-Merlin, the latter being found in natione gewisseorum . . . ad fontes galabes quos fuerat solitus frequentare (Bk. Vlll, 10) and he may merely have associated a Wessex monument and a Wessex hero with no warrant except his own sense of fitness, or the association may have existed in the legendary source he employed. Such a connexion in folk tales may well have been made ; if not the original builder of the first structure at Stonehenge, the chieftain of the Wessex Bronze Age culture who rebuilt the monument in the magnificent form in which it exists today must have been a figure whose renown throughout southern Britain was commensurate with the architectural achievement and the command of labour the monument implies. And what more likely than that Ambrosius should in the Dark Ages acquire the dim legends of his priest-king predecessor in the realm of Wessex, and through his own personality help to ensure a survival of the stories of its ancient stone temple, mingled with his own prowess against the ilivading Saxons.
If we accept the implications contained in the forgoing argument
we must also accept a literary survival which though meagre and barbaric, would nevertheless be of the same order as that of the Mycenaean elements preserved in Homer. In the story of Stonehenge in Geoffrey of Monmouth we may have the only fragment left to us of a native Bronze Age literature—a literature which would be as natural an outcome of a heroic culture such as the Wessex Bronze Age (or that of Mycenae, with which indeed it traded), as are the gold-hilted daggers of the warriors, but so infinitely more perishable. We may have a story of the builder, and of the building of the great monument to the spiritual and political ascendancy of Bronze Age Wessex, handed down as part of the sacred lore of its priests long enough to ensure its incorporation in the legends accumulating round another Wessex leader, a Roman of the Dark Ages ; then preserved in the myths of the Celtic west and finally entering the body of written record of the Middle Ages among the legendary miscellanea of a romantic medieval ecclesiastic who may have fancied it as a fairy-tale.
1 Antiquaries Jown., 1923, 111, 239—60.
2 ANTIQUITY, 1936, x, 220—1, with references.
          3 cf. the First Report of a Committee of the Southwestern Museums on this problem in Proc. Prehist. Soc. 1941, Vll.
          4 Map of South Wales showing the distribution of Long Barrows and Megaliths, pp. of introduction. (Ordnance Survey, 1936).
5 e.g. John Aubrey, Remains of Gentilisme (Folk-lore Society, 1881), 273.
          6 J. J. Parry, The Vita Merlini (Univ. of Illinois Studies in Language and Literature), 20.
7 Chorog, Ill, 6, 48; Vita Merlini, ll. 908 ff.
          8 Vita Merlini, ll. 235—6 aurum gemmasque micantes, pocula que sculpsit guielandus in urbe sigeni. Geoffrey's reference to Wayland as a worker in precious metals (cf. King Alfred's huaer sint nu thaes wisan welandes ban, thaes goldesmithes the waes geo maerost—Boethius De Consol. Philos. 11, vii) suggests a knowledge of the original Norse legend, in which Wayland makes silver-mounted cups from the skulls of Niduth's children, rather than the French romances, where ' Galland ' is invariably a magic swordsmith. It was in this latter capacity of course that he gave his name to the famous chambered tomb in Berkshire. (Depping & Michel, Wayland Smith (1847) ; Grinsell in Trans. Newbury F.C., 1939, Vlll, 136—9).
9 op. cit. esp. 15—20 ; 127 ff. ; Philolog. Quarterly (Iowa), 1925, IV, 193—207.
10 Early Vaticination in Welsh (Cardiff, 1937).
11 In conversation with my friend Mr Peter Fitzgerald Moore.
12 Mabinogion, Everyman's Library, no. 97, pp. 33—48.
13 Soc. Antiq. Lond. Research Comm. Reports : Richborough 1, 35 ; 11, 3—4 ; 111, 5.
14 ANTIQUITY, 1941, XV, 284.
15 Antiquaries Journ., 1939, XIX, 372—3.
         16 For Iron Age cauldrons in Ireland see Mahr in Proc. R. Irish Acad., 1934, XLII, Sec. c. 11—29.
          17 Oxoniensia, 1940, v, 166—7. The Frilford excavation is described ibid, 1939, IV, 1—70 ; comment on the post structure in the Iron Age temple by Bersu in Proc. Prehist. Soc., 1940, VI, 90, n. 3.
         18 Proc. Prehist. Soc., 1936, 11, 1—51 ; 1938, IV, 57 ; Arch. Journ., 1940, XCVI, 193— 222.
          19 Antiquaries Journ.,1941, xxr, 97—127 ; ANTIQUITY, 1941, xv, 142—61. Sir Cyril Fox, commenting on this, urges the importance of distinguishing ' between constructions based on the driven stake and those on the dug-in post ; between hurdlemakers' and carpenters' technique—they may have different cultural origins ' (In litt., Sept. 1941).
20 cf. Hawkes in Antiquaries Journ., 1933, Xlll, 434—5.
21 Proc. Soc. Antiq. Scot., 1936, LXX, 278—303.
22 | have discussed this more fully in Arch. Journ., 1940, XCVI, 213 ff.
          23 R. H. Cunnington, Stonehenge and its date, 1935. But see my review in Arch. Journ., 1935, XCI, 336—9. 
          24 As for instance the golden sickle for the cutting of the mistletoe, which Fox has plausibly equated with one of gilded bronze in the Late Bronze Age style. Proc. Prehist. Soc., 1939, v, 242.
         25 J. R. R. Tolkien in Soc. Ant. Lond. Research Comm. Report: Lydney, 1932, pp. 132—7.
26 ANTIQUITY, 1938, Xll, 323-31.
          27 The sense of this passage has been obscured by Giles' misleading, though ' standard ' translation. He quite unwarrantably translates moenia as ' temples ', and seems to miss the point of lineamentis deformibus in taking it to be ' mouldering away ', whereas it seems more likely that the reference is to a distorted style of representation (i.e. a ' celtic ', non-Roman, artistic convention). A similar translation of this phrase to that of Giles is given by A. W. Wade-Evans in his S.P.C.K. edition of the De Excidio, 1938. Rigentia was emended by C. W. King to ringentia, which would give ' snarling' : an attractive reading. (I am indebted to Prof. H. E. Butler for his views on the translation I have adopted).
28 Eddi, Vita Wilfridi (Rolls Series, 1879), cap. Xlll.
          29 ' Eltutus . . . . omnium artium philosophiae omnium Britannorum peritissimus erat, genereque magicus sagacissimus, etfutcrum praescius (Vita Samsoni, cap. Vll).
         30 Parry op. cit. ; for the Merlin-Ambrosius equation see also the introductory essays to Merlin (Early English Text Soc., 1899).
31 Mon. Germ. Hist., Chronica Minora 111, 171.
---------------
    
------------------------------------------------------------
    
    ---------------
    
    ------------------------------------------------------------
    
ANTIQUITY
    
THE SOURCES OF GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH
    
305
    
305
    

    
305
    
