ANTIQUITY, XL, 1966
Speculations on Stonehenge
by FRED HOYLE
Professor Fred Hoyle, F.R.S., is Plumian Professor of Astronomy and Experimental Philosophy in the University of Cambridge, and a Fellow of St John's College. His published works include The Nature of the Universe, Frontiers of Astronomy and Man in the Universe. In this article he begins with an appraisal of Professor Gerald Hawkins's theory of Stonehenge as an astronomical observatory, and goes further, arguing that the Aubrey Holes form a protractor, not a counting device, andputting vividly the dispute between archaeologists and astronomers as between the two questions 'How did they do it?' and 'How would we do it?' We are asking Professor Richard Atkinson, Professor Stuart Piggott, Professor Alexander Thom and Dr D. H. Sadler as well as, of course, Professor Hawkins, to comment on this article. We hope to print their comments in March, and Jacquetta Hawkes has kindly agreed to summarize the discussion for the benefit of those readers whose trigonometry is not all that it might be.

   ROPOSALS that Stonehenge was constructed as an astronomical observatory [1, 2, 3] with the purpose of predicting eclipses [4, 5] imply that the builders of Stonehenge, even Stonehenge I, were possessed of a degree of intellectual sophistication that seems inconsistent with the usual picture of the population of S. England in the 2nd millennium B.C. Either the people were not just primitive farmers or these proposals must be substantially in error. It is not the purpose of this paper to attempt a decision between these alternatives but to explain the nature of the astronomical arguments in more detail than has been done heretofore. My hope is that with a moderate effort it will be possible for the reader to rework the calculations on which the astronomical suggestions have been based; for only when archaeologists and astronomers have understood each other's arguments can we expect to resolve this intriguing dilemma. At several places in the discussion I shall quote the solution of mathematical problems, thereby permitting the whole discussion to be confined to simple trigonometry. These few places will be marked by an asterisk. The reader wishing to cover these gaps will need to consult a text on spherical astronomy, e.g.
  To be more explicit, the archaeologist and the astronomer are only too likely to ask quite different questions. The natural impulse of the worker in the physical sciences is to ask: How would we do it? Suppose we were landed in a different planetary system, with a somewhat different 'Earth', 'Moon', and 'Sun'. Suppose we were equipped only with crude ropes, natural boulders, and wooden posts. How would we go about discovering the properties of our new system? Could we find a way to predict eclipses, for example? On the other hand the natural impulse of the archaeologist and historian is to ask: How did they do it?
  The present paper is largely concerned with the 'How would we go about it?' point of view. It has at least the merit of being reasonably unequivocal. I also believe it to be an essential preliminary to asking the more diffcult 'they' kind of question. It leads to the conclusion that an excellent procedure for 'us' to follow would be to build a structure of the pattern of Stonehenge, particularly Stonehenge I.
ASTRONOMICAL PRELIMINARIES
North
o
(ii)
Fig. ILanded on a new planet, I think one's first thought would be to use the daily apparent motion of the 'Sun' as a measure of time, and also as a determination of the north-south alignment. If our intentions were nomadic the determination of the points of the compass would be of critical importance, but if we were obliged more or less to root ourselves in a particular place, in order to engage in pastoral and arable pursuits, the determination of the seasons of the year would be of more importance. This leads to an astronomical problem of a higher order of diffculty.
  The seasons of the year are caused by the tilt of the Earth's axis of rotation. On a time scale of a few centuries, the direction of the axis of rotation is essentially fixed in space. So, as the line from Earth to Sun changes during the year, the axis changes its orientation with respect to the Sun. The phenomenon evidently has no connexion with the rate of rotation of the Earth. The seasons would occur at the same times in the year if the Earth rotated in 5 hours or in 50 hours. Hence if we are to determine the seasons by observation we must seek a method that is independent of the rotation rate.
  All this is trivially obvious to the modern mind, but it could not have been obvious to neolithic man, To an intelligent but technically uninitiated person the overwhelming change in the sky is its apparent rotation due to the diurnal motion of the Earth. To have been able to remove this complexity, as neolithic man almost surely did, already implies a considerable sophistication. The builders of Stonehenge were not concerned with the north-south direction, suggesting that the diurnal motion was known to be an irrelevancy.
  Returning to 'us', because we are given only crude materials it is necessary that any instrument we build be large, otherwise the accuracy of angular measurement will be poor. This necessity forces us into an instrument confined essentially to the horizontal plane. With a horizontal error of no more than ± 1 ft. in the placing of a marker post or boulder, we can expect to measure angles to within ± 0-300 when the marker is set up some 200 ft. away.
  The solution to the problem of the seasons, obtained in the following section, is illustrated in FIG. I(i). The direction from the observer O towards the rising Sun varies from day to day. Between midsummer and midwinter there is a swing of approximately 800 at the latitude of Stonehenge. An accuracy of ± 0•300 is adequate to determine the date in the year to within a day or two, except at the midsummer and midwinter extremes. Because the direction of sunrise 'turns round' at midsummer and midwinter, the Sun would appear to stop and rest at these directions for a week or so. Neglecting small corrections, the directions of sunrise and sunset are bisected by the north-south alignment. It is worth emphasizing again, however, that while all four directions of FIG. I(i) exist at Stonehenge the north-south direction does not appear to be significantly marked.
 Object
  The direction of moonrise also swings back and forth over an angle of order 800. It does this in the lunar month of 27•3 days, not in the synodic month (full Moon to full Moon) of 29•5 days. There is the complication, however, that the arc is not exactly the same from month to month. At its largest, PIOQI (FIG. I(ii)), the angle of swing for Stonehenge is about 1000 . At its smallest, P20Q2 (FIG I(ii)), the angle is about 600 In section 4 we shall find that this effect arises because the plane ofthe Moon's orbit around the Earth is slightly inclined to the plane of the Earth's orbit around the Sun—the ecliptic. The time required for the angle of the monthly swing to decrease from maximum to minimum and then to increase back again to maximum is 18•61 years. This cyclic oscillation period plays an important role in the prediction of eclipses. All four directions of FIG. I(ii) appear to be marked at Stonehenge, as also do the corresporiding directions of moonset. For simplicity, these have not been shown in FIG. I(ii). They lie symmetrically placed with respect to the north-south d.irection.
THE DIRECTIONS OF SUNRISE AND SUNSET The declination of an astronomical object is defined as the complement of the angle between the axis of rotation and the direction of the object takenfrom the Earth's centre, cf. FIG. 2(i). Evidently b is unaffected by the Earth's

rotation, so it is from b that we must work if we wish to discuss phenomena independent of rotation. Our aim must be to set up an observational method for determining b, and thence to make inferences concerning the Sun and Moon.
  To make observations, convenient local standards of reference are needed. It is natural for an observer on the Earth to choose his own vertical and his own horizontal plane. A standard direction in the horizontal plane is also needed. Any direction—that to some distant tree, for example—will suffce. To the modern mind it is also natural to choose the north-south alignment, but neolithic man may not, and need not, have made this particular choice. To permit comparison with texts on spherical astronomy, I will use the north-south alignment. This is shown as ON (FIG. 2(ii)). To obtain ON draw OP parallel to the Earth's rotation axis. The plane ZOP determined by the observer's vertical OZ and by OP intersects the horizontal plane in the line ON. The angle PON is the observer's latitude n.
  In FIG. 2(ii), we also have the direction 0M of some astronomical object referred to this system. The angles h, 0 are the usual elevation and azimuth of 0M, the azimuth being measured east of north. The procedure for obtaining h, 0 is to take the plane defined by OZ and 0M. Let this plane intersect the horizontal plane in OL. Then h is the angle MOL and O is the angle NOL.
  Suppose we ignore for the moment that 0M is the direction for a practical observer on the Earth's surface, not for an imaginary observer at the Earth's centre, then the angle between OP and 0M is IT—b. The azimuth of OP is zero and the elevation is A. With .Ä supposed known, and with h, 0 measured, we now have the explicit mathematical problem of determining the angle between two intersecting lines whose elevations and azimuths are known. By a calculation using direction cosines it is not hard to show that* sin = cos h cos cos 9 -4- sin h sin X (1)
  For objects on the horizon the angle h is small. It is not exactly zero because in practice the horizon does not lie in the observer's horizontal plane. For a well-chosen site, values of h of ± 0•5 0 are to be expected due to the nature of the ground, the positive value corresponding to the case where the ground slopes gently upwards away from the observer, the negative value to where ground slopes gently downward. With h a small angle expressed in radians it is suffciently accurate to write sin h = h, cos h 1, so that (1) becomes sin = cos Ä cos 9 + h sin (2)
  As indicated above, equation (1) neglects the difference between the direction of the object as seen by the practical observer on the Earth's surface and the direction as seen by an imaginary observer at the centre. A similar reference system can be set up at the centre* , giving exactly the same azimuth 8, but changing the elevation to h + a/d where a is the radius of the Earth and d is the distance of the object. For the Sun, the distance d is so large compared to a that this 'parallax' correction is negligible. For the Moon, however, the correction to h is about 57', and we must remember to take it into account when later we come to deal with the case of the Moon.
  While considering the subject of corrections it is worth noticing that in the above argument the line 0M was assumed to be straight. This line is determined by the light received from the object in question; and the light is subject to refraction as it passes through the atmosphere. For this reason a measured value of h has to be corrected for refraction, if formula (1) is to continue to hold good. The amount of the correction depends on h itself, viz:
Measured	o	1	2	30
Correction —35 '22" —24'44"
  At Stonehenge, the most critical directions are to the north-east, where the land rises by about 100 feet in two miles. The horizon in this direction is therefore tilted upward by about 0•60 above the horizontal plane. For measured elevations of this order there is a downward correction of about 30' due to refraction.
Ecliptic
Equator
Arc TS=@  A further complication is that both the Sun and Moon subtend an angle of about 32'. This leads to ambiguity in the meaning of sunrise and moonrise. Undoubtedly the most accurate judgement of the moment of sunrise is when the whole Sun stands on the horizon, not when the centre rises above the horizon. This is because the 'centre' is a mental construct, not a visually defined point. I am inclined therefore to accept the suggestion of Hawkins [7] that sunrise and moonrise were judged at Stonehenge to be the moments when the Sun and Moon stood tangent on the horizon—i.e. when the centres had an apparent positive elevation of 16'. With a negative correction of about 30' for refraction the moment of sunrise occurred when the centre was actually depressed below the horizon by 14'. For an horizon elevation of 0•6 0 this gives some 22' elevation above the horizontal plane. This is the value of h to be inserted in equation (2).
  The second step in solving the problem of the seasons is to relate 8 for the Sun to the position of the Sun in its orbit. Viewed by an observer on the Earth, the Sun appears to move in an orbit of the same shape as the Earth's orbit viewed from the Sun. From the Earth's centre, project every point of the Sun's orbit onto a sphere of very large radius, the celestial sphere. This is done by drawing a line from the Earth's centre to each point of the Sun's orbit, and by extending the line until it intersects the sphere. The result is a great circle on the celestial sphere, the ecliptic. In a similar way project the Earth's own equator, to give another great circle, the celestial equator. The two circles intersect at the points y and B (FIG. 3(i)). The point P is the north pole of the celestial equator —i.e. the point where the Earth's axis of rotation intersects the celestial sphere. The point K is the pole of the ecliptic.
  The sun appears to move along the ecliptic in the direction of the arrow. The equinoxes occur when the Sun is at Y and B, the spring equinox at The angle @ from to the Sun determines the seasons. When @ = o we have the spring equinox, @ = 77/2 is the summer solstice, @ 7T the autumn equinox, @ = 37/2 the winter solstice. The solution to our problem lies in relating @ to b. By taking great circle arcs from P to and S we obtain the spherical triangle shown in FIG. 3(ii). The arc from P to cp is 900—this follows from the definition of Y. Also by definition, the arc length PS is 7/2—8. The arc length CPS is @, while the angle between PCP and SCP is 7/2—€, where € is the angle between the Earth's equatorial plane and the orbital plane of the Sun. At the present day the obliquity is about 230 27'. At the time of construction of Stonehenge € was about 23 0 54'.
  The spherical triangle of FIG. 3(ii) is easily soluble for 8 in terms of e and @. The result is* sin b = sin e sin (3)
We now have two equations, (2) and (3), both for sin b. Equating the right hand sides of these equations, sin sin @ = cos cos 0 4- h sin (4)
This result can be made to yield numerical results of relevance to the Stonehenge problem. These will be discussed later (p. 268) after a corresponding equation for the case of the Moon has been obtained. For the moment we simply relate (4) to what was said in section 2. For sunrise and sunset in flat country, the term in h can be omitted provided we are not concerned with precise numerical results. The simplified equation
sin e
	cos 0 =	sin @	(5)
                 cos demonstrates the swing of the direction of sunrise, discussed in connexion with FIG. I(i). The factor sin e/cos is a constant less than unity for all observers outside the arctic circle.
  For any value of @, equation (5) has two solutions for 8. This is because cos 0 = cos (2ff—0). Hence if 8 is a solution so is 27—9. Every such pair of solutions is symmetrical about the north-south line. The smaller value of 9 corresponds to sunrise, the larger to sunset. Values of 8 between o and 900 occur over the range o to for @. That is to say, between spring and autumn the sun rises on the northern side of the east-west line. At the equinoxes sin @ = o, @ = o, 7, and 9 = 7/2', the Sun rises in the east and sets in the west. At midsummer, @ = 77/2, sin @ = 1, 8 — COs—I (sin €/cos A). At midwinter @ = 37/2, sin @ — cos—l (sin e/cos R). Between midsummer and midwinter the direction of sunrise swings through an angle cos—l (sin e/cos A). PuttingÄ = 51 0 11', 23 0 54', appropriate to Stonehenge in 1850 B.C., the swing is easily found to be close to 800, the value given in FIG. I(i).
THE DIRECTIONS OF MOONRISE
AND MOONSET
The relation of the Moon's orbit to the ecliptic is similar to the relation of the Sun's orbit to the celestial equator. This is seen by comparing FIG. 4 for the Moon's orbit with FIG. 3(i) for the Sun's orbit. The centre E of the Earth is the centre in both cases. The plane of the Moon's orbit intersects the plane of the ecliptic in the line N'EN. The points N, N' are the nodes of the Moon's orbit, and they play a similar role in FIG. 4 to that played by cp and B in FIG. 3(i). The angle i between the Moon's orbit and the ecliptic is only 5 0 9', much less than the corresponding angle E in FIG. 3(i).
  The nodes N, N' are not fixed points. Neither are , B in FIG. 3(i). Both pairs of points move backwards—i.e. in the opposite direction from the Sun and Moon. The motion of is slow, however. This precession of the equinoxes has no immediate importance in the present problem, for it takes approximately 26,000 years to make a complete circuit of the ecliptic. The motion of N is very much more rapid, for N makes a complete circuit of the ecliptic in only 18•61 years, the oscillation period already noted in connexion with FIG. I(ii).

  Although the details are more complicated, the procedure now to be followed for the Moon is similar to that already given for the Sun. First, we note that equation (2) holds just as well for the Moon (except we must remember to include the 57' correction to h). The procedure is to obtain a second equation for sin ö analogous to (3). The arc length NM = 1/3, say, will now play a similar role to @ in the solar case.
  The problem cannot be solved, however, by treating the spherical triangle KNM of FIG. 4 in the same way as the triangle P CPS of FIG. 3(i). This is because the declination is defined in relation to the plane of the Earth's equator, not in relation to the plane of the ecliptic. This sets a more ambitious problem in spherical trigonometry. The problem is solved by first setting up a system of latitude and longitude on the celestial sphere with K as the pole and with the great circle arc KY as the zero meridian. The first step is to work out the latitude and longitude of the Moon in terms of NM and of + TN. Evidently, the angles t/f, determine the position of the Moon uniquely, so this first step can be carried through. Next we go back to FIG. 3(i). Here we could set up systems of latitude and longitude, one with P as pole and the great circle arc PY as zero meridian, the other with K as pole and the great circle arc KY as zero meridian. The latter is of course just the system used for the Moon in FIG. 4, whereas the system with P as pole is the one in which b appears. The essential mathematical step is to relate these two systems. * The outcome is an expression for sin in terms of t/J, 4, and of the fixed angles i, €. The result is sin b — sin (sin i cos E + cos i sin cos +)— sin € sin cos	(6)
This is the required analogue of equation (3).
  Proceeding now as before we equate the right hand sides of (2) and (6), to give
cos 9 cos = sin (sin i cos € + cos i sin € cos € sin + cos  (7)
The elevation angle has been written h' to remind us that the 'parallax correction' of 57' must be added to h. So long as we are not dealing in precise numerical values the elevation term can be omitted, and our equation then reads
cos 0 cos = sin (sin i cos + cos i sin cos é sin cos
Equation (8) is not so hard to understand as it might seem at first sight, because X, i, € are fixed angles (Ä = 51 0 11' for Stonehenge,

  We have already noted that is the analogue of @ in the solar case. The angle @ determines the seasons of the year, the angle determines the phases of the Moon. Thus @ increases from o to 27 in a year, whereas increases from o to 27 in a lunar month, 27•3 days. The complication in (8) arises from the angle 4. Reference to FIG. 4 shows that + determines the position of N in relation to CP. This angle increases from o to 27 in 18•61 years. Over any particular lunar month can be treated as a constant angle, however, The rapidly changing produces an oscillation of 9. That is to say, the direction of moonrise swings back and forth through an angle in each month, but the extent of the swing depends on 4. The largest swing occurs when o and the smallest swing when ff. Putting o in (8) gives cos 9 cos = sin (e -l- i) sin (k, (9) whereas — gives cos 9 cos .Ä = — sin (€—1) sin (10)
These equations are of the same form as (5) for the solar case, with in place of @, and with i ± € in place of €. The discussion of (9) and (10) proceeds exactly as with (5). In particular, the swings for (9) and (10) are cos—1 [sin  X]
Inserting € 23 0 54', i — 5 11' leads to a maximum swing of about 1000 and a minimum swing of about 600 . These are the values shown in FIG. 1 (ii).
THE SITUATION AT STONEHENGE
In this section we shall be concerned with the values of 9 at which the extremes shown in FIG. 1 occur. The extremes for the Sun (Fig. I(i)), are given by putting sin @ ± 1 in equation (4), viz.
cos cos 9, = ± sin E—he sin 
in which a subscript s has been given to 0, h in order to denote solar values. The outer extremes OPI, OQI of FIG. I(ii) are given by putting + — o, sin = +1 in (7), cos cos 9m = ± sin (€ + sin A, (12)
while the inner extremes OP2, OQ2 of FIG. I(ii) are given by putting T, sin — ± 1 in (7), cos Ä cos 9m = sin sin
It will be recalled that differs from h, in that h'm includes a 'parallax correction' of 57'.
  With = 51 0 11' for Stonehenge, equations ( ), (12) and (13) lead immediately to the following results:
Equation (11), most northerly rising of the
Sun:
 490 45'
+ 1•63 h:	(18)

Equation (11), most southerly rising of the
Sun:
hs sinsin €
— COS
	cos X	V(cos2Ä — sin2€)
1300 15' + 1•63 hs	(19) Equation (12), line OPI of FIG. 1 (ii):
	—1sin (€ + i)	Wm Sin
8m = cos	2
	cos 	v(cosÄ—sin2€ + i)
41 0 6' + 1•96 hm	(20)
In the last step of (20) the elevation correction 1•96 him has been written as 1•96 (hm + 57')' We have remembered to take the parallax correction into account, and hm now refers to the elevation for an observer on the Earth's surface.
  Equation (12), line OQI of FIG. 1 (ii): sin(€ 
Equation (13), line OP2 of Fig. 1 (ii).
8m cos¯l
600 31' + 1•45 hm	(22)
Equation (13), line OQ2 of Fig. 1 (ii):

The corresponding sunset and moonset values are obtainéd by subtracting (18)—(23) from 3600.
  In his recent book Hawkins gives measured azimuths for a number of Stonehenge alignments These are reproduced in the third column of Table 1 below. The relevant calculated expressions are given in the fourth column.
ARE THE ALIGNMENTS SIGNIFICANT?
Hawkins [7] has used a statistical argument to support the view that the alignments of Table -1 differ so much from what would be expected from a random distribution of stones and observing positions that it is safe to conclude that Stonehenge was constructed as an astronomical observatory. The details of this statistical work have recently been criticized by Atkinson [8]. The issue turns on how many stones and observing positions are inserted into the statistical calculation. Hawkins uses a subjective judgement to decide this critical point. For myself, I am always suspicious of a statistical argument based on data that involves a subjective judgement. If one plays a hunch on the

Table I
	Measured	Calculated
	Position	Seen from	Azimuth (0)	Azimuth (0)

9240•741 •I + I '96hmmoonriseCentre43741•1 4- V96hmmoonrise919249•149•7 + 1'63hssunriseHeelCentre49•7 + 1'63hssunrise949351'5497 + 1'63hssunriseCentre61•s60•s + 1 •45hmmoonrise91Centre1174122'2 + 1 •45hmmoonrise93128•2130'2 -k 1'63hssunrise941294130•2 -k 1 •63hssunrise92931407142'6 -F 1 •96hmmoonrise9291229•1229•8 — 1•63hssunset9394231•5229'8 — 1'63hssunset93Centre2974299•5 — 1 •45hmmoonset94309'4310 3• — 1 •63hssunset9491319•6318•9 — 1'96hmmoonsetTable 2
	Measured	Calculated
	Position	Seen from	Azimuth (0)	Azimuth (0)

Heel30—151 '2497 + 1'63hssunrise53-541206122'2 + 1'45hmmoonrise51—52130•2 + 1'63hgsunrise9—1053-5413941426 + 1 •96hmmoonrise	—	sunset
292•omoonset
3047sunset
	21—223189 — 1'96hm	moonset
(Starred numbers refer to missing stones whose positions have been estimated from neighbouring stones)


data one might just as well play a hunch on the final result.
  If Stonehenge was constructed as an astronomical observatory the builders presumably tried to make the sighting lines as accurate as possible. The large physical size of Stonehenge supports this opinion. Since there must be an unavoidable error in the placing of any particular stone or post, say an error of about a foot, angular accuracy will be better for a large structure than for a small one. If we ourselves were building such a structure, using only primitive equipment, I think we would hope for angular accuracy to within about ± 0•30• How do the measured and calculated azimuth values given in Table 1 compare with this margin of error? It is necessary to give values to h in order to answer this question explicitly. Including the various corrections discussed above, and taking the horizon elevation to be uniformly equal to 0•70 0 , the appropriate value for h is about 0'500 . We then have the following pairs of values: (40•7, 42•1), (43 •7, 42•1), (49 '1 , 5 0 •5), (5 1 %, 9•5), (5 1 •5, 5 0 •5), (61 '5,
61•2), (117•4, 122•9), (128•2, 131'0), (1294,
131•0), (140•7, 1436), (229•1, 229•0), (231•5,
229'0), (2974, 298•8), (309•4, 309•5), (319•6, 317•9). In each bracket the measured azimuth appears first. Although there are detailed variations of h from one azimuth to another, so that discrepancies of the order ± 0•5 0 might still be expected, it is clear that the differences of the numbers within the brackets in general lies far outside the suggested margin of error, 0•3 0 . Essentially this same point has been made by Atkinson [8]. It appears still more strongly if we consider Hawkins's second table of sarsen circle alignments (Table 2, above).
  Although we might expect to achieve less angular accuracy for the sarsen circle and trilithons—partly because of the diffculty of handling very large stones and partly because of the smaller dimension of the sarsen circle— the differences are large, as much as 5 0 in two cases.
  At this stage it is necessary to ask: What were the builders trying to do? More properly, what would we ourselves do? Would we really try to arrange the sighting lines to agree exactly with the calculated values? The answer to these questions depends on our motives. If our aims were purely geometrical, to reproduce the extreme directions of swing of the Sun and Moon, the directions of FIG. 1, then we would try to arrange our sighting lines to agree with the values given in the fourth columns of Tables 1 and 2. I do not think there is any doubt but that we could produce much better agreement than did the builders of Stonehenge. But if our aim were to make observations yielding the most useful information for determining the seasons of the year, and for the prediction of eclipses, then we would be most unwise to set our sighting lines precisely at the extreme directions of swing. This is because the Sun and Moon appear to 'stand still' at the extremes and it is impossible with a primitive instrument to judge the precise moment of the extreme—it would be like trying to judge by eye the exact bottom point of a very flat valley.
The solution to the problem lies in observing the Sun, or Moon, immediately before and immediately after the extreme position. The extreme itself is then judged to be the moment half-way between the two observations. This procedure gives much better accuracy. Hence it is best to direct the sighting line a degree or two inside the azimuthal extreme. The sense in which we must shift the sighting line follows a simple rule. Write for the extreme. That is to say, represents one or other of the values calculated in  Write 0 for the direction of our sighting line. Then we have the rule
981 > if Oex lies between o and 7/2,
< if lies between 7/2 and m
  This deals with sunrise and moonrise. The corresponding rule for sunset and moonset is > 9ex if 9ex lies between and 37/2
< 9ex if 9ex lies between 37/2 and 27T (25)
These rules assume that is never o or a—i.e. that we are not inside the arctic.
  Now let us return to Tables 1 and 2, interpreting the third column as 981 and the fourth column as 9ex. The question is whether our rules are obeyed. With h taken systematically as 0•5 0 , the rules are obeyed in 12 cases out of 15 in Table 1 and in 7 cases out of 8 in Table 2. The remaining case in Table 2 has
= 131 •00 , close to equality. The three discrepant cases in Table 1 are:
	PositionSeen FromG9291929491It is seen that each discrepant case involves one or other of the mound positions 92, 94, and it is natural to wonder if the presence of the mounds may not have introduced some uncertainty in our judgement of the precise places from which observations were made. Also one of the cases involves G, a position whose validity has been questioned. But even without excusing these cases the distribution is not what one would expect from a random choice. On a random basis there is an even chance of 9er—9ex having the correct sign, so that our case is similar to obtaining 19 heads in 23 tosses of a coin. The chance of this is about one in a thousand. Here there is no question of any subjective judgement being made in the choice of data. Yet there is one important point on which it is always necessary to be careful in a statistical argument. Suppose one starts from data which appear not to be random. That is to say, the probability of the data being random is a small number, p say. Now suppose we find an explicit theory which explains the data. How far should we place confidence in the theory? The answer is that one can have confidence in the theory provided that in our search for it we did not try and reject a large number of other theories. If we tried of the order of l/p theories then no great confidence should be placed in the apparently successful theory! In the present case no theories at all were tried. What happened was that the logic of measuring an azimuthal extreme occurred to me before I looked at the data. I am inclined therefore to trust the statistical argument in this case.
  The reader should not accept this conclusion without strong resistance, for the implication is far-reaching. It not only requires Stonehenge to have been constructed as an astronomical instrument but it demands a level of intellectual attainment orders of magnitude higher than the standard to be expected from a community of primitive farmers. A veritable Newton or
 (Measured)	9ex (Calculated)
42'1
5005
Einstein must have been at work—but then why not? At all events, the evidence is strong enough for it to be worthwhile our continuing to follow the chain of argument.
EQUINOXES
Without a clock the equinoxes cannot be defined as the days on which the lengths of the day and night are equal. The only concept of the equinox susceptible to measurement in 1850
B.C. was the day on which the directions of sunrise and sunset were separated by ff.
  Write 81, hi, for the azimuth and elevation of sunrise. Then (6) gives sin E sin @ = cos 91 cos + hl sin
Similarly, write 92, h2 for sunset, sin sin @ = cos 92 cos + sin X (27)
Here it is supposed that @, the Sun's longitude, does not change appreciably between sunrise and sunset on the same day.
If 02 — 91 + T, COS 02 = —COS 91, SO that 2 sin € sin @ = (hi -k h2) sin 
If the elevation terms were neglected, equation
(28) would give @ = o or and 81 would be 7/2. This would represent the equinoxes correctly (in the modern sense) and the Sun would rise in the east and set in the West. When the elevation terms are included, however, @ A or where A is a small positive angle, of the order of 1 0. Nor does the Sun rise exactly in the east or set exactly in the west. Moreover, the value of A will vary from one geographical site to another because the elevations vary. This means that the dates of the equinoxes are not well-defined by the above criterion. To within the error of measurement all sites agree on the dates of midsummer and midwinter but there must have been systematic differences of a day or two in the dates of the equinoxes. This may be the reason why equinoctial sighting lines do not play an important part in the structure of Stonehenge. Hawkins [7] reports an azimuth of 89•00 for and 89'5 0 for The angles are not exactly 900. Nor in general should they be.
  The Earth's orbit is not a circle, but since the eccentricity is small, 0'0167, we usually think of it as a circle. There is a further circumstance that encourages us in this direction. It happens that at the present day the Earth is at perihelion shortly after midwinter. So even when we take account of the true elliptic nature of the orbit it is still nearly the case that the time from midwinter to midsummer equals the time from midsummer to midwinter. Because of the precession of the Earth's rotation axis this was not so in 1850 B.C. The Earth then passed through perihelion approximately half-way between the autumnal equinox and midwinter. The effect of this was to make the time between midsummer and midwinter shorter by some 4 days than the time between midwinter and midsummer. Such a difference should have been detectable.
  If we are at all on the right lines in this discussion we must suppose that this time difference presented a deep mystery to neolithic man. If he was willing to make the effort of constructing Stonehenge for scientific purposes he must certainly have made a sustained effort to solve this mystery. I have not yet succeeded in penetrating very far into what his mental processes might have been. Numbers could not have been written, or conceived of, in our present day notation. No doubt numbers were represented by a simple tally system but this would not be suffcient for the kind of problem we are discussing here. My suspicion is that both numbers and time intervals were represented by lengths, and that the processes of arithmetic were carried through by explicit geometrical constructions.
  Returning to astronomy, consider the problem of passing from the annual oscillation in the direction of sunrise to the concept of the Sun moving annually in an orbit. We start by knowing that this is so. Indeed in section 2 we started with the orbit and proceeded to deduce the azimuthal swing. But how if one tried to proceed in the opposite direction?
  Suppose that neolithic man did manage to attribute the seasons of the year to the motion of the Sun round a circle. Now comes the terrible problem—the time from midsummer to midwinter is 4 days shorter than the time from midwinter to midsummer. With our modern minds we could proceed by supposing that the Sun did not move uniformly, but this would be an impossible concept if we were conditioned to think of equal intervals of time as equal lengths. This would force us to suppose that the Sun moved equal lengths every day. The resolution of the problem would be to distort the circle. It could be the case that the distorted circles found so often in Britain represented attempts to solve

this problem. They may not have been mere geometrical curiosities.
ECLIPSES
An approximate collinearity of the centres of the Sun, Earth, and Moon is necessary for an eclipse to occur—with the Earth between the Sun and Moon for a lunar eclipse. If the collinearity had to be strict the Moon would have to lie at one of the nodal points, N or N' in FIG. 4, and the Sun would also have to be at N or N'. Such an occurrence would be negligibly rare. However, because of the finite sizes of the Earth and Moon the collinearity does not have to be strict. The Earth casts a shadow and there is a lunar eclipse if the Moon enters the shadow. Because the Moon's radius is much smaller than the Earth, it is possible for the whole Moon to be immersed even though no point of the Moon cuts the axis of the shadow. This permits a fair tolerance.
  The Moon passes through each nodal point once every month. At each such passage there is a possibility of an eclipse. The issue depends on where the Sun happens to lie. This permits precise questions: When the Moon is at N of FIG. 4 how near N' must the Sun be for a lunar eclipse to take place? How near to N must the Sun be for a solar eclipse to take place? The answer is within about ± 100 for a lunar eclipse and within about ± 15 0 for a solar eclipse. * Similarly whenever the Moon passes through N'.
  At this stage I come to the substance of my recent article in Nature [5]. In these days of the photocopier it is not necessary to reproduce the argument here. I will simply confine my remarks to explanatory comments.
  The Aubrey circle is not a counting device but a protractor, with the holes serving as division points. A protractor is necessary for around the board? It would be interesting to know how large a peg-board would need to be in order to achieve the same angular accuracy as the Aubrey circle. It seems thoroughly worthwhile for a practical test to be made. Given comparable stone, wood, and bone tools to those used in 1850 B.C., given rough pieces of wood, construct a circle of 56 holes accurate to within ± 0 •5 0 •
  A peg-board would be very vulnerable. An accidental disturbance of N would destroy the calibration of the instrument. Accidents would inevitably happen over a time scale as long as 20 years. It would be possible to make several peg-boards but this would inevitably lead to confusion should two boards not agree with each other. The solution I think would be to have a standard definitive system which it was impossible to disturb by accident. This can be achieved by using heavy stones for M, N, and S, heavy enough not to shift through a casual knock. Immediately this demands a circle of very large radius in order to achieve the necessary angular accuracy. By all means have a peg-board as well. Indeed a small board would be invaluable for making the actual predictions, but the Aubrey circle is necessary as the reference standard.
SPECULATIONS
I wish to return to the discussion of section 1. It is possible to say, unequivocally I believe, that we ourselves could use an instrument of the Stonehenge pattern with great effectiveness. Before I began the present investigation I was unaware that it is possible, given only the resources of 1850 B.C., to make successful eclipse predictions (not total solar eclipses of course). I had read Neugebauer's account of eclipse prediction by the Babylonians around 600 B.C., but I had never understood exactly I have formed several cultural hypotheses concerning the builders of Stonehenge. It seems to me that the three essential requirements for high intellectual achievements are availability of food, leisure and social stability, and good communication. It must be possible for people in one district to know what is being done in other districts. Outstanding individuals must be able to get together. The young must be taught. Preferably the brightest youngsters should be brought together into a 'university'. There seems to be no reason why the society in S. England around 2060 B.C. did not meet all these requirements.
  A curious point of technology is that primitive African tribes, using the drum, are able to transmit information more rapidly than the socalled civilizations of Europe were able to do up to the invention of the wireless telegraph. Could the drum have been used in 2000 B.C.? If one is to assert that the culture of 1850 B.C. could not have conceived of Stonehenge, in the way astronomical considerations seem to suggest, it is necessary to prove that the answers to questions such as this are negative. It is not suffcient to leave them open.
  I suppose that much of the diffculty in crediting the builders of Stonehenge with the intellectual understanding which their own structure almost forces on us arises from the error of supposing intellectual advance to be synonymous with technological advance. Even after the invention of writing the two are not the same. Before the invention of writing the two could have been widely different. A chance technological discovery, the smelting of metallic ores, could have produced marked cultural inversions. It is an interesting speculation that a cultural inversion occurred at Stonehenge, perhaps due to the spread of metals to the British Isles. I have the impression that the skilled understanding necessary to operate Stonehenge I had been lost by the time of Stonehenge Il. It may not have been recovered even by the time of Stonehenge Ill. The essential trick of Stonehenge I is to hold back the sighting lines from the azimuthal extremes. Without this trick, Stonehenge could not be operated as a successful eclipse predictor, even though the methods of Stonehenge Ill might well have served to measure angles more accurately than the simple sighting lines of Stonehenge I.
  The Aubrey holes were refilled with chalk rubble by the original builders, Later they were used for crematorial purposes. Could this later use have been due to memories of fires lit by the original builders? On a clear morning the glare of the Sun prevents accurate observation, but only a little smoke generated by a few 'smudge pots' will permit one to look directly at the solar disk without discomfort. This could be an example of an originally rational practice being changed, after a cultural inversion, into an irrational practice?
  Finally, let me mention a genetic possibility. Nowadays, we are accustomed to assuming that 'all men are equal', a belief that has some validity when there are only small genetic variations between one group of people and another. Nowadays the human gene pool is fairly well mixed. In 2000 B.C. it may not have been well mixed, in which case it is likely that the intellectual norm of some groups was higher, and perhaps considerably higher, than the present day norm. In such circumstances a cultural inversion might arise simply from mixing. The centuries following 2000 B.C. are known to have been a period of movement. Various peoples moved into S. England from the Continent. It is not impossible that this movement produced a sharp genetic decline leading to a cultural inversion.
APPENDIXI have left over the discussion of two further astronomical lines to this Appendix because the following alignments reported by Hawkins [4] raise more diffcult and still more remarkable problems.
Position Seen from Measured Azimuth ( 0 )

Omitting the elevation term in comparison with the sin i term, and setting o or the solution for 0 is
sin i cos €
	0 cos —l. sin	(30)
cos Ä

Heel9482•79484.694roo• 194277-7It will be clear from Hawkins's article that these directions are to be associated with the Moon but I think it is fair to say that it is not easy to understand precisely what the association is supposed to be. I therefore began the investigation of these directions by discovering their meaning, which I will now explain. The reader will notice that in every lunar month the directions of moonrise and moonset swing across these azimuthal values. Unlike the directions discussed in the main paper they are not azimuthal extremes—they lie well within the sector defined by OP2, OQ2 of FIG. I(ii).
  With the very slight approximation of writing cos i 1 in equation (7)—it will be recalled that i 5 0 9'—we can rewrite the equation in a more compact form,
cos 0 cos = sin € sin (dß—+) -F sin i cos € sm — h' sin	(29)
The reader will recall that i, E, are fixed angles. The azimuth of moonrise changes markedly from night to night because changes by as much as 13 0 per day. The angle varies slowly on the other hand, over 18•61 years. In any particular lunar month is effectively constant.
  Because the inclination i is a small angle the sin i cos € sin term in (29) is in general small compared to the sin sin (2/J—+) term. But in each lunar month there are two short intervals during which this is not so, namely when  is close to o or T. The elevation term is in general less than the sin i term by the ratio of h' to i. With h' of order I Q this ratio is about 0•2.
The solution depends on The smallest value of 0 given by (30) occurs when — 7/2, = 1 and is cos—l (sin i cos E/cos X) — 82•5 0 .
The largest value is given by = 37/2, '  —1 and is (sin i cos e/cos A)
97•5 0 . The corresponding moonset values are 277•5 0 and 262•5 0 respectively,
  The agreement for 94 Heel Stone and D —+ 94 is close. Because this is not a case where the direction of moonrise remains stationary there would seem to be no advantage in offsetting the alignments. Hence the discrepancies for 94 B, 94 E are serious. Unless it can be shown that the errors of 2 0 or more are due to ambiguity in the placing of the mound position 94, I would be inclined to dismiss these cases as random coincidences. The agreement for 94 —+ Heel Stone is so close, however, that I feel it to be dangerous at this stage to dismiss the alignment as a random one, particularly as both the Heel Stone and Station position 94 are outstanding features of Stonehenge. Yet to pursue the matter further leads to what seems to be an astonishing conclusion.
  Reference back to (29) shows that the term we have been examining, sin i cos e sin the only one containing the inclination i of the Moon's orbit. Now it is this inclination that plays such a critical role in the eclipse problem. So in principle a method that separates out the inclination could be important. But how are we to ensure that If—4 is o or T? This angle is not directly measurable with primitive techniques, so only an indirect device can be used. At full Moon we know the Sun and Moon are in opposite directions. At new Moon they are in the same direction. Hence if we know the angle @ for the Sun at new moon or full moon we know at any rate approximately. If it happens that a new Moon or a full Moon occurs at an equinox we also know that @ is o or 7, and hence that is o or qr. (For new Moon at the spring equinox is o, for a full Moon 2/1—4 is 7. The situation is reversed for the autumnal equinox.) Finally, if it also happens that the full Moon rises on the aximuthal direction 82•5 0 we know that d' 7/2 (+ 37/2 if moonrise is on 97•5 0 ). So we know both and 2/5, and hence
  Here we have a new method for calibrating an eclipse predictor. It depends on a number of events happening to occur together: moonrise or moonset on 82•5 0 etc., moonrise or moonset coinciding with full Moon or new Moon, all this occurring at an equinox. Could the implications of such a complex situation have been understood in 1850 B.C.? An affrmative answer would force us to raise the level of intellectual perception of the builders of Stonehenge still higher. The evidence for it lies in the correctness of the 94 Heel Stone alignment and in the importance evidently attached by prehistoric peoples to the equinoctial full moon. The relation of full Moon to the equinox must have bitten very deeply, since its influence persists to the present day, in the prescription we still use for fixing the date of the Easter festival.
  A most remarkable point still remains. The method could not work. The moment of full Moon cannot be judged with suffcient accuracy, even if all the necessary events happen to occur together. A detailed examination of the problem shows that misjudging the moment of full Moon by only an hour in time would lead to a 200 error in the determination of +. The diffculty is partly due to the sin i cos E sin term in (29) being small, and partly to the sighting lines 82•5 0, 97•5 0 being taken at the turning values of sin a/s. It would be better to use a sighting line near 900 ; 93 + F, 89•00 or 94 C, 89•5 0 . The requirement would be for a full Moon at the equinox to rise in the east.
  It is satisfactory that even at its best the method is not a good one. Only with a stroke of luck could it be made to work, whereas the methods described in the main text must work. If it had been otherwise it would become hard to understand why Stonehenge is so decisively constructed for determining the azimuthal extremes. The sighting lines at present under discussion are peripheral to the main structure. It seems that either we must dismiss the 94 
NOTESHeel Stone alignment as a coincidence or we must suppose the builders decided to try out a new idea, an idea that could not have been based on observation because, as we have seen, it could not succeed. If we follow the astronomical argument to its present rather uncertain limit we have to suppose that in 1850 B.C. a major scientific instrument was not only built to observe the world, but arrangements were made to test a new theoretical idea. If further studies confirm this point of view, archaeologists will not be alone in having their preconceptions shattered, for it has become a precept among physical scientists that the deliberate construction of instruments to test ideas belongs only to the modern era.

[I] A. Thom, J. Brit. Ast. Soc., 64, 396 (1954).
  [2] C. A. Newham, Yorkshire Post, 16th March, 1963', Nature, 211, 456 (1966).
  [3] G. S. Hawkins, Nature, 200, 1963, 306.
  [4] G. S. Hawkins, Nature, 202, 1964, 1258.
  [5] F. Hoyle, Nature, 211, 1966, 454.
  [6] W. M. Smart, Spherical Astronomy (Cambridge, z 956).
  [7] G. S. Hawkins, Stonehenge Decoded (London, 1966).
(8] R. J. C. Atkinson, ANTIQUITY, 1966, 212.
ANTIQUITY

SPECULATIONS ON STONEHENGE

262

262



262

ANTIQUITY

SPECULATIONS ON STONEHENGE

262

262

SPECULATIONS ON STONEHENGE



