ANTIQUITY
  
Acknowledgements: I am most grateful to Mr David Bowyer, Mr Donald Kellaway, Mrs Hazel Weymes, Dr Brian Hope-Taylor and Professor Stuart Piggott, who read and commented on an earlier draft of this note.
HAWKES, s. c. and c. WELLS. 1975. Crime and punishment in an Anglo-Saxon cemetery, Antiquity, XLIX, 118—22.
The Station Stones at Stonehenge
This note, by Mr A. R. Thatcher, challenges recent theories that the Station Stones at Stonehenge were constructed to point at the extreme positions of the moon.
Some important theories have been based on the precise orientation of the so-called Station Stones at Stonehenge. These four stones lie outside the stone circle and form a rectangle. The positions of the four corners are conventionally numbered 91—4, thus:
94
93
  The stone 93 is still upright. The stone 91 is still there, but has fallen. Stones 92 and 94, however, are missing. According to Professor Atkinson 'the precise shape of the original figure and the precise directions of sight-lines between pairs of these stones can thus no longer be determined.' (1966, 216.)
  The estimated directions of the two sides 93/94 and 92/91 are both parallel to the line joining the centre of the stone circle to the Heel Stone. They therefore point to the midsummer sunrise, and on this there is no dispute. However, it has been further claimed by Hawkins (1963) that the sides 91/94 and 92/93 and the diagonal 91/93 point at the extreme directions at which the moon rises and sets.
  Hawkins considers, for example, the direction in which the full moon which is nearest to the winter solstice will set. He calls this, for short, the 'midwinter moon'. Because the orbit of the moon varies over a cycle of 18•6 years, the direction in which the midwinter moon will set
HOGARTH, A. C. 1973. Structural features in AngloSaxon graves, Arch. y. , cxxx, 104—19.
JONES, M. u. and w. T. 1975. The crop-mark sites at Mucking, Essex in (ed.) R. L. S. BruceMitford, Recent archaeological excavations in Europe, 175—6, 184—5 and Fig. 58.
PHILLIPS, c. w. 1940. The Sutton Hoo ship-burial, Ant. J. , xx, 149—202 (esp. 160), and Figs. 4 and 5.
is not the same each year, but varies between two extremes. At one extreme, which last occurred in 1969 and will occur next in 1987, the midwinter moon sets along the direction of the sides 91/94 and 92/93 (looking northwest). At the other extreme, for example, in the year 1978, the midwinter moon sets (according to Hawkins) along the line of the diagnonal 91193.
NOTES AND NEWS  Just as the most northerly direction in which the sun ever rises gives the direction of the midsummer sunrise, so the most northerly direction in which the moon ever sets would give the required direction for the sides 91/94 and 92/93. This direction, at what is conveniently described by Thom as the 'major standstill' of the moon, could be identified without too much technical diffculty if observations of moonset were made regularly for several decades, given the necessary degree of organization and motivation which this implies. Indeed, Newham (1972) has suggested that the postholes in the entrance gap, just north of the line joining the centre of Stonehenge to the Heel Stone, may have been used to observe the most northerly direction of moonrise at the 'major standstill' in just this way. But the second extreme direction of the moon, at its 'minor standstill', allegedly corresponding to the diagonal 91/93, would be far more diffcult to identify. It is neither the most northerly nor the most southerly direction in which the moon ever sets. In theory it could have been found as the most southerly of those directions at which the full moon sets at midwinter; but if the direction of the diagonal 91/93 was really determined in this way, the builders of Stonehenge would have had to make a very long series of observations indeed before they could place the Station Stones in position. Moreover, even when they had done so, they would only have been able to observe the moon actually rising and setting along the direction of the sightlines at very long intervals, for example in the years 1969, 1978, 1987 etc.
  There is, however, an alternative possibility, namely that the diagonal 91/93 was designed to point at the sun rather than the moon. It was suggested by Lockyer (1906) that the diagonal 91/93 points to the sunrises and sunsets which are half way between the equinoxes and the solstices. In early May and early August it points (looking north-west) to the sunset, and in early November and early February (looking south-east) to the sunrise. Many of the megalithic alignments in Brittany and in Great Britain point to the sunrise and sunset at these four dates (see le Rouzic (1897), Giot (1960), Thom (1967) and Rollando (1971)). In particular, we may note that at Carnac the alignment of Menec points to the sunrises and sunsets which are midway between the equinoxes and solstices; next to this, the alignment of Kermario points to the sunrise at the summer solstice; and next to this, the alignment of Kerlescant is within a few degrees of the sunrise and sunset at the equinoxes. Thus these solar orientations seem to have been known at a very early date indeed.
  Thus we have two rival theories for the diagonal 91/93 of the Station Stones. According to Hawkins it points to the moon at its 'minor standstill' ; while according to Lockyer it points to the sun.
  The most accurate survey of the Station Stones is that made by the late C. A. Newham. His observations are to be published by Professor R. J. C. Atkinson, who has kindly communicated them to the author of this note. They show that the azimuth of the diagonal 93/91 is 117 0 21', and that the altitude of the horizon
(corrected for refraction and parallax) is 33' .looking south-east, and 36' looking north-west.
Taking the latitude of Stonehenge as 51 0 11', the obliquity of the ecliptic in the year 2150 BC as 23 0 57', and the inclination of the moon's orbit to the ecliptic as 5 0 9', it can be shown that the midwinter moon at the 'minor standstill' would set with an azimuth of 300 0 5' at last light, or at azimuth 2990 24' when its orb was tangent to the horizon. Even on this latter definition of moonset, the moon would be 2 0 3' away from the Station Stones. In the reverse direction, the midsummer moon at the 'minor standstill' would rise with azimuth 121 045' at first light, or 40 24' from the Station Stones, and even further away when the orb is tangent to the horizon.
  On the alternative theory of Lockyer, the declination of the sun half way between the equinoxes and solstices would be ± 16 041 The azimuth of sunrise in early November and early February would be 118 0 1' at first light, which is 40' from the Station Stones. In the reverse direction, sunset in early May and early August would be at azimuth 296 0 25' at last light, which is 56' from the Station Stones. These errors are distinctly less than on Hawkins's theory and it would be diffcult to improve on them (given the altitude of the horizon) if the diagonal was intended for observation in both directions.
CONCLUSION
The above calculations show that the diagonal 91/93 of the Station Stones does not really point to the position of the moon at its 'minor standstill'. If the diagonal points to anything, it would seem to be the directions of sunrise and sunset at the dates half way between the equinoxes and solstices, as suggested by Lockyer and found in many other cases of megalithic monuments. It may also be noted that the sides 91/94 and 92/93, though these do indeed point to extreme directions of the moon at its 'major standstill', could just as easily be 'explained' on the hypothesis that stones 92 and 94 were placed on the circle of the Aubrey Holes in the positions which would make 93/94 and 92/91 point to the midsummer sunrise.
  Thus there seems to be room for doubt about the claims which have been made for lunar (as distinct from solar) orientations of the Station Stones. Moreover, if Hawkins's theory for the diagonal 91/93 is rejected, there seems to be very little evidence that the 'minor standstill' of the moon was observed at all at Stonehenge.
  The author is greatly indebted to Professor R. J. C. Atkinson for comments on an earlier version of this note.
ANTIQUITYATKINSON, R. J. c. 1966. Moonshine on Stonehenge, Antiquity, XL, 212—6.
GIOT, P. R. 1960. Brittany (London).
HAWKINS, G. s. 1963. Stonehenge decoded, Nature, cc, 306.
LOCKYER, N. 1906. Stonehenge and other British stone monuments (London).
NEWHAM, c. A. 1972. The astronomical significance of Stonehenge (Leeds).
ROLLANDO, Y. 1971. La préhistoire du Morbihan (Vannes).
ROUZIC, z. LE. 1897. Carnac : les monuments mégalithiques (Quimper).
Excavation of a zimbabwe in MozambiqueTHOM, A. 1967. Megalithic sites in Britain (Oxford).
  
Manekweni is the ruin of a large enclosure of dry-stone walling in southern Mozambique, 50 km from the coast. It was the subject of three weeks' excavation in June and July 1975, by a team led by me, assisted by Tim Gates, financed by the British Institute in Eastern Africa and under the auspices of the University of Lourengo Marques. The architectural style, building techniques, contents and date of the ruin show it to be contemporary with Great Zimbabwe (Garlake, 1973) and culturally very closely related, yet it lies in the coastal lowlands, 500 km from Great Zimbabwe, and there is no other ruin significantly nearer than this. This makes it a site of some importance, for the Great Zimbabwe culture has been thought of as limited to the granite plateau of Rhodesia and its immediate neighbourhood.
  The ruin is of limestone which, in this particular area, lies just beneath the surface of the soil. The enclosure wall, I •50 m high and 1 •50 m wide, is faced with close-fitting, selected and matched blocks, laid with enough care to achieve short, undulating lengths of coursing. The stone in the centre of the wall is more loosely piled. This building technique is characteristic of the Great Zimbabwe culture and must have been developed on the plateau, for it is designed to take advantage of the way granite splits naturally into parallel-sided blocks. It is much less suited to limestone.
  If one applies the stylistic criteria developed by Whitty in 1958 (Robinson et al., 1961) to categorize the walls at Great Zimbabwe, the Manekweni walls would be considered to belong to the earliest wall style at Great Zimbabwe (Summers's Phase Ill, at present dated to the thirteenth century). But this means little in a limestone building. More significantly, the turrets, buttresses and platforms that are frequently found in the later architecture of Great Zimbabwe do not occur at Manekweni. The enclosure is an ellipse, 50 m and 65 m across. There are few enclosures in Rhodesia so large, though it is only about half the area of the Elliptical Building at Great Zimbabwe.
  The deposits contained the characteristic artifacts of a Rhodesian zimbabzve or any other south-east African prosperous later Iron Age site: tanged iron arrow and spearheads, iron slag, tuyéres; occasional copper beads; copper wire coiled round a fibre core to form long lengths of bracelets and anklets; beads cut from ostrich and snail shells and spindle whorls cut from sherds. The pottery from the lower and middle levels of the excavations closely resembles wares of the Great Zimbabwe culture in Rhodesia in vessel shape and size, fabric, finish and in the technique, location and motifs of the decoration—though, also characteristically, decoration was not common. Some sherds with large, simple, incised geometric motifs, coloured with graphite and haematite, are very like those of the last (Khami, fifteenth— eighteenth century) phase of the culture in western Rhodesia. In the uppermost levels the only decoration was a single, narrow band of hatching—a motif that is a minor trait in pottery from the lower levels and one that is not matched inland. Small, monochrome, glass cane beads, the commonest trade goods of the East Coast settlements, were found in a variety of colours in the upper levels. This is an assemblage typical of the Khami phase of the Great Zimbabwe culture. The only glass beads in somewhat earlier deposits were Indian reds—a type that appeared early in the present millennium and did not change. The lowest deposits contain no imports. Food remains—the bones of cattle, game, fish and tortoise and the
144
  
144
  
144
  
