Stonehenge from without
C.c. WRIGLEY*
Mr Wrigley (Reader Emeritus in History, University of Sussex) presents himself as a witness to British prehistory 'from without', because he is a 'historian of sorts' rather than archaeologist. Surprised to see prehistorians turning to ethnography and contemporary social theory, more than the history of intervening centuries, he offers here a different perspective.
  
A non-archaeologist who writes about Stonehenge probably needs a word or two of self-justification. I would submit, however, that the very success of archaeology in working out the history of the monument and placing it in the context of its time, or times, has released it into the public domain. Now that we know with some precision what was constructed and when, the next question is obviously 'Why? ', and this presents a challenge to the intellect and imagination of us all. Some, being properly wary of what the word 'irnagination' might portend, may prefer that a question to which there can be no certain answer should remain unasked; but that is not going to happen. People will go on trying to make sense of Stonehenge, because such a remarkable structure clearly has much to tell us about human behaviour in general. Stonehenge does not stand alone, of course; the real Everest of British prehistory is Avebury. but there, I think, archaeology proper has more to do before the base camp can be set up. I am naturally far from supposing that I have made or can make sense of either monument, but would like to point to aspects of the problem that have been somewhat neglected in recent academic discussion.
  As a historian of sorts I naturally have a more than average interest in these matters, especially as I hold that history is the study of the human past, which is not partitioned in any fundamental way by distances of time. Differences in the character of the evidence no doubt
 37 Highdown Road, Lewes. East Sussex B.N7 IQE.
enforce a practical division of labour. But as an Africanist I am accustomed to think of archaeologists as colleagues in the same endeavour, and am a little disconcerted to find that in British studies relations are less close. Something of a Chinese wall seems to have been erected at 55 BC to separate history from 'prehistory' — though a good case could be made for saying that the latter continues to AD 600 in England or even later.
t This term, property of Colin Renfrew, is used here as a convenient synonym for •the archaeology of power', ct. the subtitle of Bradley (1984). 'Political archaeolcgy' might be better.
ANTIQUITY 63 (1989): 746-52  Historians, for example, were conspicuously absent from the famous interdisciplinary conference at Sheffield in 1971 (Renfrew 1973), though the theme of 'culture change' was one that we would consider central to our concerns. Likewise, the topics discussed by 'social archaeology' f in the past two decades state and class formation, the rise and fall of dominant élites, the relations between ritual authority and secular power are a large part of what historians think history is about. Yet its practitioners seem to prefer the company of contemporary sociological theorists and to seek comparative evidence from almost any source other than documented history. To generate models about chambered tombs they ransack the files of world ethnography but do not, overtly, consider their own or their contemporaries' behaviour, or that of intervening British generations. To interpret Stonehenge they invoke Cherokee ritual centres and Egyptian pyramids, Minoan peak sanctuaries and stone circles in Melanesia, but seldom the cathedrals at Salisbury and Wells. It is not wrong to range far afield, and I shall not deny myself the use of African ethnographic data where it seems enlightening. But it is a strange self-denial that turns history in the narrow sense into a forbidden territory. Literacy makes a great difference, of course, but surely not such a difference that the presence of documentaend idence puts all comparison with prehistoric societies out of court? The reason for the exclusion, it must be suspected, lies rather within the contemporary structures and prejudices of academic life.
  Part cause and part consequence of this alignment is a deep distrust of singularities and events, a horror of contingencies, of anything that might disturb the smooth application of processual laws. Thus the arrival of beakers in Britain, which used to be seen as a historical event of great magnitude, is now merely part of a predictable, even perhaps a cyclical, process (Bradley 1984a: 65—89, 165). Closely related is the almost passionate rejection of diffusionist explanations — a strange prejudice in the light of the known history of Christianity, Islam, Buddhism, the steam engine, political elections and the game of football.
  Historians are properly in awe of archaeological skills, but they can perhaps claim certain assets of their own — apart from some acquaintance with sections of the past on which there is incomparably better information. One is a sense of the wholeness of human experience, and another is a degree of self-awareness which has, it is true, been claimed for modern archaeology as well (Renfrew 1982) but which tends to be dimmed there by objectivist pretensions. We know that it was not only in the Neolithic that 'the past was manipulated and recreated in order to support social change' (Thomas 1988: 555) or, on the contrary, to represent the social order as unchanging and natural' (Thorpe 1983: 8); and it would have been a dull history student who was surprised by the dictum that 'every age has the Stonehenge it deserves or desires' (Hawkes 1967), or that 'each age has its own archaeology, in which the interpretation owes as much to the interests and prejudices of the interpreter as to the inherent properties of the data' (Renfrew 1982); for he would have been insistently taught that history, including prehistory, is always in part the history of one's own time. It is well recognized that prehistoric astronomer-priests flourished during the heyday of the scientist and the engineer, in the Britain of the 1960s. Nowadays, when scientists are a depressed class, the makers of henges and suchlike have taken on the lineaments of more truly contemporary heroes — the men of wealth and power.
  The small and scattered peer polities of British archaeology interact to produce, on the whole, a very cohesive culture, and, notwithstanding wide ideological differences, most of their artefacts in a given period bear a strong family resemblance. For the best part of two decades it has been agreed that prehistoric studies, from the early Neolithic on, should be about power; their themes are competition, ranking and prestige; and they seek to identify the various ways in which dominant groups asserted, protected and extended control over territories and populations. Renfrew (1982) proposed that there should be an archaeology of mind, but this turned out to be mainly another way of talking about politics. And soon afterwards a more specific and rather sophisticated model was developed for the description of social change in Britain during, roughly, the 3rd and 2nd millennia BC (Renfrew 1984: 126ff; Bradley 1984; Bradley & Gardiner 1984). It has a distinctly familiar appearance to citizens of Britain in the 1980s. The leading theme is conflict between two different kinds of élite. On the one hand were those whose power was derived from the manipulation of communal ritual and expressed in collective architectural enterprise. On the other, there was a new breed of thrusting individualists who relied on the control and display of prestige goods, and whose richly equipped single inhumations show their contempt both for traditional aristocratic ritual and for collectivist values. As we see, Porsches and Montblanc pens proclaim their owners' power without need for legitimating ritual or ideology. The old élites might build ever taller tower housing and ever more grandiose council offices; they might multiply peace parks and subsidise popular theatre; they might rally to the defence of the universities and the BBC; but the forces of social change were too strong for them, and the sarsen structures of Stonehenge Ill were their last despairing effort. For, Thorpe & Richards tell us (1984: 68), ritual-authority structures are closed and static, prestige-goods structures are open and progressive and so are bound to win.
C.C. 
  It has also been shown that even before the advent of the great henges and stone circles social democracy had been a mere facade. The collectivist ideology apparently implicit in the great tombs of the early and middle Neolithic had actually been a mask for élite dominance, their incipiently Stalinist architecture being already 'a direct function of a hierarchical system with its concomitant tenure patterns and powers of coercion' (Kinnes 1975: 27, cf. Tilley 1981). Thus the heroes of the round barrows in the later 3rd millennium can be seen as liberators and energizers rather than as conquerors and oppressors. 'The ancestors had been overthrown and the living had come into their inheritance' (Bradley 1984: 37).
  To point out that current interpretations of British prehistory contain a contemporary parable is not to say that they are wrong. Lesson One for history students, certainly, is that what the past tells us about itself depends on what we ask it, and what we ask it depends on what we want it to tell us about the present. Lesson Two, however, is that the interrogation must be conducted according to the rules of scholarship. And Lesson Three is that 'present-mindedness' can be a positive asset; each generation acquires insights into the past that were hidden from its predecessors by lack of appropriate experience. There is no doubt that the 'archaeology of power' has not only asked interesting questions but has also got some valid answers. But the questions are not necessarily the most interesting ones, nor are the answers the whole truth. New insights derived from a new present are no less partial than those of previous generations.
  There is, in particular, a danger that for some time to come archaeology may be as onesidedly political as it used to be onesidedly cultural or environmental. Certainly the pursuit of power and prestige has always been a major human preoccupation; and of course the consequences of other people's power can bc very serious for us all. But there arc other things in life and therefore in history — and prehistory; and social archaeology needs to recognize (as it occasionally does) that there is a dimension to the great monuments that lies outside its terms of reference. These are not only British concerns; studies of Stonehenge and Great Zimbabwe have followed a strikingly parallel course. During the colonial era diffusionist hypotheses prevailed in both cases (Renfrew 1967; Garlake 1973), to be replaced after the collapse of empire first by nationalist insistence on local creative enterprise (see Ammerman (1989) for a critique of British post-colonial 'indigenism') and then by attempts to infer the social and economic relations that would have generated such monuments. Zimbabwe was seen as the central place and prestige proclamation of a regional élite made rich by cattle-herding or gold-trading or both (Garlake 1973; 1978; Beach 1980). Still more recently, however, there have been signs of dissatisfaction with an explanation that leaves a great deal unexplained, and a revival of interest in Zimbabwe's symbolism, not all of which has a political reference (Huffman 1981; de Heusch 1982).
  It is not hard to imagine the impression of overwhelming power that was conveyed to 12th-century English hovel-dwellers by the great cathedrals rising in their midst. But these structures were not only imposing instruments of social control. They were also cathedrals, works of consummate art that were wrought (so their designers said) to the glory of God. They cannot be understood outside the context of Christian belief.
  Contemporary social scientists are clearly somewhat wary of religion. Indeed they do not use the word if they can possibly avoid it, preferring to speak of ritual, symbol or ideology. Their approach to the phenomenon is not only positivist (as is mine) but also reductionist; they treat it only as a particular mode of political or economic behaviour, one of the resources available to those engaged in social competition. Sometimes indeed it seems to be prescnted as a kind of primitive politics, an inferior substitute for proper coercive power. Yet religion has its own problematic. which has to do with death: not how to avert it but how to cope with the knowledge that in the end it cannot be averted. Even the most zealous power-seekers must have moods and rnoments when they are aware of this problem, remembering with T.S. Eliot that
The captains, merchant bankers, eminent men of letters ,
The generous patrons of art, the statesmen and the
rulers
Distinguished civil servants, chairmen of many committees
Industrial lords and petty contractors, all go into the dark,
and accepting with Sophocles, in the words quoted by Renfrew at the end of his inaugural lecture, that
For every ill man hath found its remedy Save only death.
  We turn, then, with enthusiasm to Aubrey Burl, who, without ignoring the findings of social archaeology, is prepared to study ritual and symbol in their own right, and who, in particular, restores the dignity of death, as a matter of fear and grief, not merely an opportunity for the living to indulge in status-seeking games. His main thesis, that Stonehenge was in the first instance a charnel house, a temporary resting place for the dead whose bones would eventually be bestowed in the barrows round about, is very persuasive. Yet there are some reservations to be ventured.
  Burl tends to re-mystify the past, repeatedly insisting that 'the prehistoric world was not ours' (1987: 215), writing of 'sorcery' (1980: 198) and of 'the strange and alien thinking of Bronze Age people in Britain' (1981a: 1), and echoing Atkinson's (1977: 11) well-known warning against seeing prehistoric people as 'ourselves in fancy dress'. Assent depends on what is meant by 'ourselves', Certainly the makers of Stonehenge were not professors of archaeology or astronomy. Nor were they late20th-century business executives, consciously allotting part of the budget to the promotion of the corporate image. But these are highly specialized kinds of contemporary man, and the general run of present-day humanity might not find the ideas of the 3rd millennium BC so very alien. The Stonehenge people, after all, were human beings, who may be presumed to have had the common human needs — for food and shelter, for sex and affection, and also for order and rneaning. Do we not still fear death, for ourselves and others? Do we not still employ symbolic discourse in a variety of uses, from poetry to advertising? And anyone who supposes that magical thinking is defunct need only go into an up-market bookshop and observe the space allotted [here to works of pure unreason.
  Moreover, the makers of Stonehenge were not just people; they were among our own ancestors, and the continuity of' habitation and culture has never been completely broken. So we may reasonably expect to find quite specific affiliations. Especial relevance, it is suggested, attaches to one item of behaviour in the rational, materialistic Britain of the 1980s, where quite large numbers of people go to church on Christmas Eve to celebrate the midnight mass. Some of us have few other links with official Christianity and are not necessarily endorsing supernaturalism. Nor are we seeking social status, for none now accrues to church-going. We simply feel it right to come together for singing and ceremony at the darkest moment of the year, and in this way to recharge hope. With luck we shall see a few more springs, and after us there will still be people, the enduring stone structure of the church and song at the turning of the year.
  Be it noted that we are not indulging in magic (or 'sorcery'), which is the misapplication of metaphor (and metonymy) to the sphere of practical action. We are not trying to ensure the year's turning, but are using it as a proper religious metaphor, a way of coping with mortality. And this procedure, it is suggested, has a very long history, though with some variations of form. For Christians, the moment of revelation 'came upon the midnight clear', but at Newgrange, it seems, people waited for morning, when the first ray of the midwinter sun would illumine the great tomb's ultimate recess (Ray 1989; O'Kelly 1989: 106). At Stonehenge, however, as at Maes Howe (Burl 1981a: 125—6), it was 'Christmas Eve' that was more probably crucial. Here we may picture the celebrants gathering to watch the failing sun sink between the pillars of the great trilithon. Then, when it had vanished behind the southwestern horizon, they turned about to face the splendour of the rising moon, and saw that darkness had not prevailed.
  All historical interpretations, all reconstructions of the past that go beyond 'What?' and 'When?' , inevitably depend on the use of analogy. They cannot therefore aspire to proof in the scientific sense but only to a greater or lesser degree of conviction. They are also necessarily idiosyncratic, since they result from an interaction between the data (with which they musi of course be consistent) and the mind of the interpreter, which has its own peculiar resources of reading and experience. And it is through the aggregation of idiosyncracies that understanding can advance.
My own subjectivities have led me to revive
C.C. 
an astronomical perspective on Stonehenge. If that perspective has faded in recent years, it is partly for technical reasons growing doubts about the reality of the proposed alignments — but more importantly for intellectual ones; the alleged astronomical enterprises were not convincingly motivated. We need not doubt that in the 2nd and 3rd millennia BC there were individuals with a passion for the understanding of nature. What is hard to credit is that society would have indulged them with such a huge proportion of its slender resources. (In its context Stonehenge must have been the equivalent of many CERNs.) A similar imbalance between cost and benefit discredits utilitarian explanations in terms of farming calendars or tidetables. As for the eclipse-prediction hypothesis, that surely derives from memories of King Solomon's Mines, of Captain Good intimidating the natives with the aid of the Nautical Almanac, and thus belongs to the 'Mycenaean' phase of Stonehenge studies.
  But astronomical interest becomes more plausible when sun and moon are recognized as signs carrying a high emotional charge. The moon especially is a very widespread sign, not exactly of death, as Burl suggests, but rather of recurrence. As Eliade pointed out (1949: 130), it is the pre-eminent natural symbol of the eternal return, rising and setting, waxing and waning, and apparently controlling that most elementary of all periodicities, the rhythm of the female body. Many African myths make the simple point quite explicit: the moon dies, like man; but unlike man it comes to life again. It is thus apt to represent society, which is constantly renewed while individuals disappear for ever.
  It is not surprising therefore that the intellectuals of prehistoric Wessex should have been so eager to keep track of its errafic movements. But this, they soon discovered, was no easy matter. Let us suppose that in the year when the rit:ual was first planned the moon reached its fullness on one of the nights of the winter solstice, and also that it rose at the point where the Heelstone was to be set— or between that stone and its lost partner. So far, so good. But in other winters the dying of the sun and the fullness of the moon would not coincide so neatly, and the moon's rising would wander about the horizon in a disconcerting fashion. The common notion that 'cults' of moon and sun are separate, chronologically successive and even antagonistic is surely mistaken. These are always complementary elements of a symbolic system, and it is their relationship that is the subject of concern. Thus Newham (1972: 7) was surely right to claim that much of the intricacy of Stonehenge followed from the discovery that the movements of the two great lights of heaven are not in harmony. This caused dissatisfaction, not for scientific or practical reasons, but for aesthetic and religious ones. There was, it seemed, a wrongness at the heart of things. Jn a wellordered universe the lunar month would be a whole number of days and the solar year a whole number of Jnonths, and the moon's azimuth would follow the sun's in a regular way. Ritual and architecture must therefore somehow restore the proper order that is missing in nature. Characteristic of ritual behaviour is a neurotic perfectionisrn, a conviction that the observances will not work unless they are precise. It was thus necessary to know exactly where the moon would rise at midwinter. It is possible that real scientific discovery was a by-product of this obsession; for some have supposed, on the strength of the causeway marker posts, the 19 bluestones of the final setting, and even a Greek report — much later in date but perhaps derived from old tradition — of a 19-yearly visit by 'Apollo' to a far northern temple, that the Stonehenge priests worked out the Saros and Metonic lunar cycles.
  Perhaps, then, we can discern in the later Neolithic that passionate concern for the measurement and ordering of time that has distinguished the culture of western Europe throughout the historic period. That concern was not, as rnight be thought, solely the product of an industrial and commercial society in which time is money. Before there were clocks there were church bells, the ordered monastic day, the stately procession of the Christian year; and it may well be that the capitalist concept of time was easier to grasp because there was already a long-standing religious preoccupation with the arrow that points towards our death and a determined effort to make it describe a circle. Clocks record linear time, but until very recently they themselves had cyclical form.
  Astronomy, however, is only one of the codes used by myth and ritual to express the hope of recurrence. Another widespread and ancient metaphor was embodied in the institution of sacred kingship; and in Africa the two symbolisms were so closely linked that king and moon were almost identified. In the large, very conservative kingdom of Burundi, for example, the king reigning in the late 19th century was actually called 'Moon'. His writ no longer ran in the outer provinces, whose people, left to the mercy of local barons, believed that he had retired to his celestial home. They therefore gave an ecstatic welcome to the leader of a German reconnaissance party, believing that the moon-faced stranger arising in the east with a powerful retinue was their king come again to bring peace. Later the expedition went on to 'the mountains of the moon' , a district in the north of the country that contained the royal tombs and has been described by a modern ethnographer as 'a kingdom of the beyond, an Other-Burundi'. For kings of this sort ritual was not an epiphenomenon, a political resource; it was the main reason for their existence. They might or might not have economic, judicial or even military roles, but their basic function was to dramatize and sacralize the main events of human life and so to assure (not ensure) its perpetual repetition. The king is dead, long live society!
  The main positive proposal of this essay, then, is that sacred kingship operated in Early Bronze Age and later Neolithic Britain (perhaps even earlier) and that henges were the theatres
References
AMMERMAN, A.J. 1989. On the Neolithic transition in Europe, Antiquity 63: 162—5.
ATKINSON, J.F.C. 1977. Interpreting Stonehenge, Nature 265: 11.
1979. Stonehenge. Revised edition. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
BAUMANN, O. 1894. Durch Massailand zur Nilquelle.
Berlin: Reimer.
BEACH, D.N. 1980. The Shona and Zimbabwe 900 1850. London: Macmillan.
BRADLEY, R. 1984. The social foundations of British prehistory: themes alid variations in the archaeology of power. London: Longman.
BRADLEY, R. & J. GARDINER. (ed.). 1984. Neolithic studies. Oxford: British Archaeological Reports. 133.
BURGESS, C. 1980. The age of Stonehenge. London: Dent.
BURL, A. 1979. Prehistoric Avebury. New Haven &
London: Yale.
1980. Science or symbolism: problems of astroarchaeology, Antiquity 54: 191—200.
where their recurrent dramas were performed. The thinking behind such dramas was not as strange and alien as Burl suggests. VVe too have a 'sacred' royalty, which comes most fully into its own when one of its members is being born, enthroned, married, coming of age, celebrating a jubilee or lying in state. And though we may live much longer on the average than our prehistoric forebears we have not been exempted from mortality.
  In some ways, indeed, we suffer a deeper insecurity than theirs. For some time past we have had to live with the philosophical despair generated by our understanding of entropy, but now there are more urgent threats to the survival of society and species. It becomes conceivable that after us there will not be people, and new force accrues to Wilfred Owen's prophetic line:
For God's invincible spring our love is made afraid.
  Is it surprising, therefore, that on many people today the ancient Stones should exert an emotional as well as an intellectual fascination? For Burl (1987: 217) does well to quote Vaughan's vision of eternity as a ring of light. There could be no better symbolic assurance of continuity than a circle of imperishable rocks, linked in various ways with the intermittent but everreturning lights of heaven.
1981a. Rites of the Gods. London: Dent.
1981b. 'By the light of the cinerary moon': chambered tombs and the archaeology of death, jn C. Ruggles & A. Whitworth, Astronomy and society in Britain during the period 4000—1500 BC. Oxford: British Archaeological Reports. 88.
1983a. Prehistoric astronomy and ritual. Princes Risborough: Shire Publications.
1987. The Stonehenge people. London: Dent.
CHIPPINDALE, C. 1983. Stonehenge complete. London: Thames & Hudson.
CHRETIE'N, J-P & E. MWOROHA. 1970. Les tombeaux des bami du Barundi, Cahiers d'études africaines 10: 40-79.
ELIADE, M. 1949. Le mythe de l'éternel retour. Paris:
Gallimard.
1958. Death and rebirth. New York: Harper.
GARLAKE, P. 1973. Great Zimbabwe. London: Thames & Hudson.
1978. Pastoralism and Zimbabwe, Journal of African History 19: 479—93.
HAWKES, J. 1967. God in the machine, Antiquity 41: 174-80.
C.C. 
HEUSCH, L. DE. 1982. Rois nés d'un coeur de vache. Paris: Gallimard.
HUFFMAN, TEN. 1981 Birds and snakes: expressive space at Great Zimbabwe, African Studies 40: 131-50.
KINNES, I. 1975. Monumental function in British Neolithic burial practices, World Archaeology 7: 16-29.
NEWHAM, C.A. 1972. The astronomical significance of Stonehenge. Shirenewton: Moon Publications.
O'KELLY, M.J. 1989. Early Ireland. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
RAY, T.P. 1989 The winter solstice phenomenon at Newgrange, Ireland, Nature 337: 343—5.
RENFREW, C. 1967. Colonialism and megalithismus, Antiquity 41: 276-88.
(ed.) 1973. The explanation of culture change.
Models in prehistory. London: Duckworth.
1982. Towards an archaeology of mind. (Inaugural lecture). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 1984. Approaches to social archaeology.
Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press
THOMAS, J. 1988. The social significance of CotswoldSevern burial practices, Man n.s.23: 540—59.
THORPE, I.J. 1983. Prehistoric British astronomy: towards a social context, Scottish Archaeological
Review 2: 2—10.
THORPE, I.J. & C.C. RICHARDS. 1984. The decline of ritual authority and the introduction of beakers into Britain, in Bradley & Gardiner (1984): 67-84.
TILLEY, C, 1981. Conceptual frameworks for the explanation of sociocultural change, in I. Hodder, G. Isaac & N. Hammond (ed.), Patterns of the past.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
748	WRIGLEY
  
	STONEHENGE FROM WITHOUT	747
  

  
