Reports
Stonehenge saved?
G.J. WAINWRIGHT*
As was noticed in the December 1995 ANTIQUITY, the present surroundings of Stonehenge — premier monument of European prehistory — are unhappy. Geoffrey Wainwright, head of archaeology at English Heritage, reports the current proposals to make a fit setting for
Stonehenge, and what rnay happen now

The present position
Stonehenge is one of the best-known and most important monuments in Europe, and its status is reflected in its designation as the centrepiece of a World Heritage Site. For England it is a national heritage icon and its management provides a litmus test for how English Heritage, the National Trust and Government care for our heritage.
  Stonehenge was taken into guardianship by Parliament long ago. This responsibility was inherited by English Heritage upon our creation in 1984, and thus the stones themselves and the 12-acre triangle of land on which they stand are in the ownership of the State but protected and managed by English Heritage. We also lease from the National Trust an area across the A344 road to provide a free car-park for visitors, who reach the monument via a concrete tunnel under the road.
  Part of the surrounding downland which forms the historic and natural setting of Stonehenge, and which contains a great number of important associated archaeological sites, is owned and managed by the National Trust. All of this National Trust land is held inalienably and in perpetuity for preservation. It cannot, by law, be disposed of, altered or developed without the consent of the Trust. If there were any such proposal to do so to which the Trust objected, it has the right, uniquely, to take its case to Parliament for consideration of the national interest. English Heritage and the National Trust are therefore, in different but comple-
mentary ways, charged with the protection and management of Stonehenge and its landscape, and for a number of years have been partners in a joint enterprise designed to provide Stonehenge with a setting worthy of its importance.
  What we see today has been rightly describecl by the Public Accounts Committee of the House of Commons as a •national disgrace'. The setting of the monument is marrecl by the continuous stream of vehicles passing along the A303 and A 344. The free car-park is a hideous intrusion on the landscape, and 700,000 visitors each year trudge through a concrete underpass to reach the monument, whilst unknown numbers risk life and limb to rush across the A344 in order to get a free view of the monument and to stroke the Heelstone just inside the wire fence. Despite the valiant efforts of the monument manager and her staff to alleviate the conditions, it is truly a cause for national shame that we have allowed one of the most important prehistoric monuments in the world to be so degraded.
  One reason for the present lamentable state of affairs is that it has resulted from an accumulation of short-term decisions from earlier times when Stonehenge was managed as a single monument rather than a focus within a landscape which runs to the horizon. Also the two main roads and their junction were constructed long ago without any regard for the monument or its setting. Furthermore, although in 1984 the new and energetic English Heritage declared the sorting-out of Stonehenge to be a priority,

* English Heritage, Fortress House, 23 Savilo Row, London WIX 1 AB, England. Received 12 December 1995, accepted 12 December 1995, revised 12 Januarv 1996.
ANTIQUITY 70 (1 g96): 9—12
10

FIGURE 1. The immediate Stonehenge region, with major archaeological features. As well as these standing earthworks, many features lie buried or make themselves visible on air photographs. Four of the road options for re-making the main A303 highway are shown:  the Grey route, running in previously untouched country to the south;  the Yellow route, along the present alignment that runs just south of Stonehenge; it would have a short tunnel there, made by covering over a deep open cutting.
 the Green route preferred by English Heritage/National Trust and by the November 1995 Planning
Conference, of a long bored tunnel under the whole surroundings of Stonehenge;  the northern Purple route, as revised by English Heritage/National Trust, with a short bored tunnel.

after 10 years of negotiation no major physical improvements have been implemented. Everyone can agree that the present state of affairs is no good but individual groups have found it well-nigh impossible to work together to a common goal.
  English Heritage and the National Trust are working in close partnership to protect the archaeology and to re-unite the historic landscape at Stonehenge. Our joint vision is to form a Stonehenge Trust which will manage the World Heritage Site as a Stonehenge Millennium Park where the public will be able to roam freely, uninterrupted by roads, fences and 20th-century detritus.
  A powerful voice in the negotiations has been the Department of Transport who in 1993 identified the Yellow (on-line) and Grey (southern) routes as part of their public consultation on plans to make the A303 a dual-carriageway road constructed to the Trans European Road Network standard between Amesbury and Berwick Down. In July 1994, Steven Norris, Minister at the Department of Transport, publicly withdrew the Yellow and Grey routes, and this was confirmed by Viscount Goschen in the House of Lords on 30 and 31 October 1995. In July 1994  at the Stonehenge Conference in the QEII Conference Centre — Mr Norris announced the setting-up of a joint working party consisting of the Highways Agency, English Heritage and the National Trust. 'I am delighted that the Department and English Heritage will be able to work together with the National Trust, with us all sharing a simple common goal — to produce the best, not the cheapest but the best solution for Stonehenge,' said Mr Norris.
In the ensuing months, the working party identified a number of technically viable options including a long 4-km tunnel (The Green 'l'unnel) and a northern route incorporating a bored tunnel at the east end of the Cursus.
The 1995 Planning Conference and its outcome
In September 1995 the Highways Agency announced a second phase of consultation and issued a brochure, which included the Yellow and Grey routes previously withdrawn by Mr Norris and a surface northern route — the Purple route. In addition they announced a Planning Conference into the proposals 10 be held in November 1995. The Planning Conference Procedure is relatively new and explicitly stated to be non-statutory and informal. There are potentially valuable opportunities for delegates to provide information on attitudes, opinions and reasoning under an independent chairman appointed by the Highways Agency. Any consensus reached by the Conference is regarded as being helpful in informing the Secretary of State for Transport, but is not necessarily determinative in the selection of a final route.
  We in English Heritage and the National Trust were surprised that the options identified by the working party were not included in the Conference leaflet published by the Highways Agency. They had apparently been dismissed on grounds of cost, but we were not aware of any cost—benefit analysis or other appraisal undertaken by the Highways Agency to justify this decision. We were clear that we totally opposed the three surface options (Yellow, Grey and Purple) on grounds of environmental impact and their effect on the local population. We were [herefore cletermincd [hat the Conferenco should discuss the additional options which had been iden[ified by the working party but nol included in the Conference brochure, especially since wo considered that they provided an oppor[uni[y to arrive at an acceptable scheme.
  We therefore put forward two options al the Planning Coulkwence for discussion by the delegates:
The Green Tunnel
A detailed study was made by Ha[crow at the requesl of the Highways Agency, and presented to lhe joinl working party, on a Iwin bored tunnel of approximately 4 km running from New King
Barrow Ridge to west of Fargo plantation. This would have no impact on archaeology, landscape, environment and local housing. It is technically feasible, and our estimate of the cost is E200 million. The Highways Agency had a higher estimate of the cost but we had not seen their detailed analysis of this or of any cost— benefit analysis which would have to take into account the benefits of the proper conservation and presentation of Stonehenge made posSible by the tunnel.
The Purple Route
We believe that a proper solution for the is a long tunnel passing beneath the World Heritage Site. Alternatively, if a long tunnel cannot be afforded, there may be an acceptable diversion to the north, provided that such a diversion has minimum impact on local people, the environment and the archaeology. Even partially to achieve these aims, such a route would require an 850-m bored tunnel at the east end of the Cursus at a cost in excess of C3() million.
  Following a week of intense debate in early November 1995 the Planning Conference agreed the following resolutions amongst others:
1 Considers there is an urgent and immediate need for a bypass of Winterbourne Stoke and supports a northern route for it which should bc developed to mitigate its effect on local interests and be built as soon as possible as a separate and independent scheme.
2 Endorses the Government's commitment to the UK obligations under the UNESCO Convention on World Heritage Sites to enhance the setting of Slonehenge, Ihrough the removal of adjacent roads and re-siting of the visitor centre.
3 Supports the objectives of English Heritage and National Trust as managers of the Stonehenge Monumenl and owners of the surrounding land to seek the restoration of [he Monument to its landscape through the closure and reslora[ion to downland or the between Stonehenge Cottages ancl Longbarrow Cross Roads, and the A344 between Stonehenge Bottom and Airman 's Corner and the re-siting of the present visitor facilities.
4 Considers that the closure of the depends on there being an acceptable alternative route for this section of the A 303 which satisfied County and District Planning Policies and guidelines and avoids 1 110 disruplion of local cornmunities.
12
5 Supports the development of facilities for visitors to Stonehenge in the context of a sustainable development plan and visitors' transport choices.
6 Considers that subject to adequate safety provision, facilities for the traveller to stop and view Stonehenge in its landscape should be retained in addition to facilities for the visitor.
7 Notes the various horizons visil)le from Stonehenge and agrees with the concept of a Stonehenge Bowl with the monument at its centre as the area which gives Stonehenge its special setting, and which should be avoidecl by any route for the diverted A3()3.
8 Rejects 11me northern Purple Route, its variant and its proposed modification by English Heritage and the National Trust, none of which is acceptable to local communities.
9 Does not support tho southern Grey Route which passes through the southern limits of the Stonehenge Bowl and affects inalienable land owned by National Trust.
10 Supports in principle the proposal by English Heritage and National Trust for a long tunnel under the Stonehenge site but recommends further investigations are carried out to establish a portal west of the A360 to link with Winterbourne Stoke Bypass.
1 1 Recognizes that cost of a long tunnel is far in excess of the funds likely to be available from the current transport budget and supports the efforts of English Heritage and National Trust to obtain government or other funding for the tunnels as part of the restoration of the World Heritage Site and the creation of a Stonehenge Millennium Park.
12 Recommends that any tunnel under Stonehenge is built at a sufficient distance from the Monument to avoid anv disturbance to the Stones both dur ing construction and when the tunnel is in use.
13 Requests [he Government to give swift and serious consideration to the resolutions of this Conl'erence in Ille hope that Stonehenge may be approl)lialely restored to its landscape as soon as possible.
Tho Conference therefore endorsed our joint aims of closing the and A344 and The re siting of the present visitor facilities through the construction of a long tunnel under the World Heritage Site. All other options were rejected. A report on these recommendations will be prepared and submitted to the Secretary of State for Transport.
Conclusion
The next step is for the order of costs for the tunnel solution to be agreed between the Highways Agency and ourselves, and for a case to be made to Government for the high cost — in excess of million which will be involved. This will bring the issue of the price we pul on the most important parts of our heritage into the public arena. In bringing the long-tunnel option before the Planning Conference and securing the consensus of the delegates to it, we have secured backing for the ideal solution — but will the resources be found to secure it for future generations? Stonehenge is special and as deserving of funds as any cultural icon, and we must press to ensure that this is recognized.
  Since we estimate that the 4-km tunnel will take at least six years to complete, English Heritage and the National Trust have decided to divide the creation of the Stonehenge Millennium Park into two phases. The first phase will involve the closure of the A344; the removal of the existing Visitor Centre and car-park; the restoration of the landscape and removal of fences within the World Heritage Site north of the A 303; a new Visitor Centre at Countess Farm outside the World Heritage Site; a transport system taking visitors from the new Visitor
Centre to viewing points within the World Heritage Site whence they can walk to Stonehenge; and the purchase or negotiation ol' management agreements of all land within the World Heritage Site. VVe intend that work should start in 1996 with completion in good time for opening in the year 2()00 to celebrate the new millennium.
REPORTS

REPORTS



