CRADDOCK, P. T. , D. GURNEY, F. PRYOR & M.J. HUGHES. 1985. The application of phosphate analysis to the location and interpretation of archaeological sites, Archaeological Journal 142: 361-76,
CROWTHER, J. 1997. Soil phosphate surveys: critical approaches to sampling, analysis and interpretation, Archaeological Prospection 4: 93—102.
FENTON, A.J. 1968. Early manuring techniques, in R. Mercer (ed.), Farming practice in British prehistory: 210—17. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
FOX, H. 1981. Approaches to the adoption of the Midland System, in T. Rowley (ed.), The origins of open field agriculture: 64-111. London: Croom Helm.
GOUGH, J.W. 1930. The mines ofMendip. Oxford: Clarendon Press. HURST, J. 1976. The pottery, in D.M. Wilson (ed.), The archaeology ofnnglo-Saxon England: 283—348. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
JOHNSON, A.H. 1956. Examination of soil from Corrimony Charnbered Cairn, Glenurquhart, Inverness-shire, with special reference to phosphate content, quoted in S. Piggott, Excavations in passage-graves and ring-cairns of the Clava group, Appendix Il, Proceedings of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland 88: 173—207.
MILLETT, M. & S. JAMES. 1983. Excavations at Cowderys Down, Basingstoke, Hampshire 1978—81, Archaeological Journai 140: 151-279.
847
PROUDFOOT, B. 1976. The analysis and interpretation of soil phosphorus in archaeological contexts, in D.A. Davidson & M.L. Shackley (ed.), Geoarchaeology: earth science and the past: 93—113. London: Duckworth.
PROVAN, D.M.J. 1972. Soil phosphate analysis as a tool in archaeology, Norwegian Archaeological Review 4: 37— 50.
RACKHAM, O. 1986. The history of the countryside. London: Weidenfield & Nicolson.
RAHTZ, P.A. 1979. The Saxon and Medieval palaces at Cheddar: excavation 1960—62. Oxford: British Archaeological Reports. British series 65.
ROBERTS, B. 1987. The making of the English village. London: Longman.
SCHWARZ, G. T. 1967. A simplified chemical test for archaeological fieldwork, Archaeometry 10: 57—73.
SNYDER, W.s., M.J. COOK, E.s. NASSET, L.R. KARHAUSEN, G. PARRY HOWELLS & I.H. TIPTON. 1975. Report of the task group on reference man, International Commission on Radiological Protection 23. Oxford: Pergamon Press.
TAYLOR, C.C. 1983. Village and farmstead. London: George Phillip.
WADE-MARTINS, P. 1980. Fieldwork and excavations on village sites in Launditch Hundred, Norfolk, East Anglian Archaeology 10. Norfolk Archaeological Unit, Norfolk

Analogy and Stonehenge: some responses
In June ANTIQUITY published a novel contribution by Mike Parker Pearson and his
Madagascan colleague Ramilisonina, which addressed the question of the significance of stone at Stonehenge(ANTlQUlTY 72: 308—76). They argued that stone symbolized death and the dead, and provided examples from ethnographic studies to support this notion. The paper has stimulated two replies — from John Barrett & Kathryn Fewster, and from
Alasdair Whittle. We are pleased to publish these here, as part of the continuing debate on analogy in archaeology, and on Stonehenge.
Key-words: henge, landscape, ethnography, analogy, megalith, ancestors, metaphor, Madagascar Stonehenge: is the medium the message?
JOHN C. BARRETT & KATHRYN J. FEWSTER*Museums Service.

Introduction
* Department of Archaeology & Prehistory, University of Sheffield, Sheffield SIO 2TN, England. j.barrett@sheffield.ac.uk
Received 17 September 1998, accepted 1 October 1998.
ANTIQUITY 72 (1998): 847-52The ancestors have been employed in the archaeology of the Neolithic for some time now. They have been used to structure our understanding of its earliest monumentality, and their later absence from the landscape has been used to define the character of the late Neolithic and early Bronze Age (cf. Clarke et al. 1985). Parker Pearson & Ramilisonina's interpretation of Stonehenge has, however found a new home for them in the 3rd millennium and suggests that the ancestral presence continued to dominate the early Bronze Age landscape of the 2nd millennium (Parker Pearson & Ramilisonina 1998). The argument is important and, if accepted, will have considerable implications for our understanding of the mechanisms by which the burial and ceremonial rites of the later period emerged. We stress that it is the argument which merits critique, for that argument contains within it logical procedures by which we are invited to construct an understanding of the 3rd millennium BC and to find a context from which Stonehenge may be viewed afresh. In particular we wish to question the ways certain universal, and thus essentially ahistorical, structures have been identified and then used in an attempt to 'explain' processes which will have operated in historically specific conditions.
The search for universals: ethnographic analogy
Parker Pearson & Ramilisonina (hereafter PP&R) have been methodologically explicit about their use of ethnographic analogy from Madagascar in their interpretation of Stonehenge. This is a major strength of the argument, and it is hoped that studies like this will lead to a renewal of interest in the mechanics of ethnoarchaeology. Other than a few notable exceptions (Wylie 1985; Layton 1992) ideas about the use of analogy, which received much attention in the processual forum (Binford 1967; 1980; Yellen 1977; Gould 1978), have not been seriously reviewed more recently. However, the interpretation that PP&R present is, as with all interpretation based on analogy, vulnerable, and this vulnerability has not been fully addressed. Given that nothing will ever be proven about the past using ethnographic analogy (Ucko 1969; Yellen 1977; Gould 1978; Hodder 1982; cf. Binford 1967: 1980) their argument could have been presented as a possibility and lost nothing of its potential. PP&R attempt to demonstrate the 'correctness' of their analogy by firstly, bringing in anthropological data additional to their own case-study in Madagascar which leads them to the conclusion that the ancestor cult is universal in small scale societies which base their organization on kinship affiliation (PP&R 1998: 310). Secondly, a relational analogy (which PP&R term an analogy of materiality) is used to suggest that the structuring principle, that has been identified in Madagascar and that links wood to the living and stone to the ancestors, is universal (PP&R 1998: 309). We shall take each in turn and show that neither is universal. However, when vulnerability is acknowledged, neither needs to be universal in order to promote a useful analogy.
Universality of the ancestor cult
To suggest that ancestor cults are universal is an over-simplification of the richness and diversity of religious practice in societies which base their organization on kinship alliance. Thus: 'beliefs in the continued existence of the human soul after death are quite widespread, but the nature of this existence is variously conceived' (de Waal Malefijt 1968: 155). Most societies have elements of ancestor worship and it is this that is picked up in Steadman et al.'s (1996) re-analysis of Swanson's (1964) study. PP&R rely on Steadman et al.'s findings to argue for universality, but it is a matter of determining what importance that ancestor veneration has over other religious aspects. For example, Steadman et al. begin with the Azande and they show, rightly, that the Azande recognize ancestors (cf. Swanson), but this is tantamount to a dismissal of what Evans-Pritchard (1937) went to great length to show in his original ethnography — that by far the overriding supernatural concern for the Azande is one of living witches, of cause and effect in the living world, and of the maintenance of social order through time by means of the oracle. To describe this extraordinary phenomenon in terms of ancestor veneration alone is to mis-represent the fundamental concern of Azande religious practice.
  Where the same organizing principles are identified in different social formations we would argue that analysis should explore how such principles could arise in widely differing contexts and critically evaluate the extent to which such a universality actually exists. We would contrast this open and, indeed, more sceptical approach with the path towards an unwarranted reductionism which seeks to subsume social and cultural diversity under the heading of a single, albeit common, organizational category. British social anthropologists, for example, rarely discuss religion without explicit reference to the social context within which that religion operates. It is acknowledged that there is a great deal of variation in the way societies define who is, or who is not, a member of the kin group, and that kinship systems operate with a variety of functions including the organization of power and the inheritance of property. There may or may not be religious attributes of a society which can be assigned to certain kinship types. However, those societies in which people define their kin groups according to descent from a common ancestor are likely to be associated with a religion based on a veneration of the dead, where religious practice can often be found as a means of legitimizing kinship affiliation. But descent is not the only means of tracing kinship; 'groups based on descent from a common ancestor are not the only kind of kinship groups, but they are the ones that anthropologists have concentrated on' (Fox 1967: 51). Other societies define their kin groups according to ego's relationship to a living person, and in these systems networks of kin spread out laterally among living relatives. Elaborate ancestor cults are not commonly associated with such systems. For PP&R therefore to argue that ancestor worship is universal without addressing the full diversity of social and religious practice as it has been identified by anthropologists, and without discussing the social context in which ancestor worship is found, is detrimental to the argument they present.
Universality in materials
A second universal relationship, this time between social behaviour and material culture, is produced in PP&R's analogy which argues that the intrinsic hardness of stone has a natural link to the hardness of men, maturity, the desiccated dead, and ultimately the ancestors whereas the softness of wood relates to women, babies and the world of the living. PP&R call this an analogy of materiality although the analogy 'types' they define (PP&R 1998: 309—11) tend to overlap at many levels, and it could be argued that their analogy of materiality is a form of relational analogy, it being possible to appeal to a 'natural' link between the two categories of concepts (see Hodder 1982: 16). However, although an evocative relational argument can be made for the softness of babies and the hardness of desiccated corpses, it is more difficult to argue relationally for the hardness of maturity and maleness and the ancestors. As is shown by PP&R, such concepts are embedded in certain Malagasy cultures (see PP&R 1998: 311— 13 for the Tandroy and Bloch 1995: 214 for the Zafimaniry of Madagascar) and, as such, the universality of the single and decontextualized relationship between wood and the living, and stone and the ancestors, is brought into question. This produces a similar problem to that
84 g
of PP&R's discussion of religion out of social context; in lifting this concept of hardness out of the Androy context in order to create a fixed set of structural relationships that facilitate their analogy, PP&R have made a by-passing link between material culture and social meaning that does not actually address the human agency by which that meaning was constructed.
The problem with universal arguments The trouble with the allusion to universality in PP&R's argument (i.e. all societies are ancestor based, and stone is to ancestors as wood is to the living) is that it directs debate towards finding the exception to the rule. Salmon (1982) argued that universal statements such as 'all swans are white' were not conducive to constructive academic interchange because the discovery of a single black swan would not only refute the statement per se, but would also undermine the discoverer's confidence in the statement-maker. Having found a black swan, how could the discoverer be assured that there might not be green, blue or red swans? Had the original argument run along the lines of 'most swans are white' then it would have been a point of scientific interest to find a black one, and what is more, the original statement would not have been negated (assuming one did not find more black swans than white that is), as such, the debate about swan colour could continue productively. PP&R argue that wood is to the living as stone is to the dead (the ancestors). A 'black swan' to this universal may be found in the material culture of the Indians from the Northwest Coast of America who used wooden totem poles to depict their ancestral genealogies and who placed these totem poles adjacent to the wooden houses of the living. Such arguments, however, are essentially uninteresting as they do not build towards a greater degree of understanding. PP&R could have made it easier to take forward their ideas by fully acknowledging the vulnerability of the analogy, by returning us to the complexity of specific historical conditions, and by not seeking to squeeze the data, innapropriately, into universals.
The meaning of material culture
It is now generally accepted that material culture cannot be analysed purely in instrumental terms. That is to say, whilst material culture undoubtedly fulfils certain physical requirements —It provides food, shelter, clothing and so forth — it also constitutes part of the world which the inhabitants who used that material understood. The crux of the matter is that understanding involves making a series of temporally situated judgements on the basis of analogy and metaphor which places the immediate experience into a broader context. Thus whilst the outside observer (the archaeologist or anthropologist) may once have regarded the exploitation by those whom they observed of certain food-stuffs, for example, as simply fulfilling the physical need for nourishment, the inhabitant will have regarded the selection and treatment of those food-stuffs as being proper to their requirements according to a certain wider cultural logic which is continually reasserted through a series of 'rhetorical' practices.
  The great contribution of Lévi-Straussian structuralism to anthropology has been to claim that the ways in which different elements of a culture make sense to the inhabitant is always through the ways in which they are juxtaposed in relation to other elements of that same culture. Thus if, as Parker Pearson & Ramilisonina assert, the essential hardness of stone is used as a physical metaphor for the 'hardness' or 'timelessness' of the ancestors in the southern British Neolithic and early Bronze Age, then that metaphor was not something which was given (however reasonable or evocative it may appear to us for whatever reason), but a metaphor which made sense according to a network of conceptual and practical relationships, along the lines of 'stone is to ancestors as wood is to the living as . . etc., etc.'. Thick description, using Clifford Geertz's terminology, requires not only the mapping of as many of these metaphorical relationships as possible within a particular cultural context, but also an understanding of the ways social practitioners used and made sense of them (Geertz 1973).
  It is therefore misguided to assume that the implication of Lévi-Straussian structuralism for the analysis of any cultural system is that it requires us to uncover the general logic which unites the cultural system of signs. However, this appears to be what PP&R are attempting, and we assume that when they write of 'structuring principles' they are referring to the fundamental logic which they believe once ordered the Neolithic cultural system. It is into such a static and uninhabited system of signs that they have inserted Stonehenge and by so doing claim to have discovered its meaning.
  The problem with such an approach is that the logic of the cultural system as inhabited never exists as a single system at any one moment. The only way it can appear to exist as such is to the outside observer and thus through the writings of certain anthropologists and archaeologists. In effect, what these external observers have done is to forget the practical and strategic interplay by which the inhabitants constantly reworked and manipulated an essentially ambiguous set of symbolic relationships; a constant process of using, dismantling and patching-up systems of signs which is never finished. Instead, these observers seem to believe that the symbolic system not only existed independently of practice but also actually determined the practices of the inhabitants who were responsible for maintaining it. If this were the case then we would appear to have no means available to us to understand how such systems ever changed. It is rather like claiming that competent language users who communicate in conversation and talk do so by the mechanistic application of the pre-existing rules of grammar; it ain't so. Bourdieu (1990: 12, our emphasis) has put it this way:
If . . . practices had as their principle the generative principle which has to be constructed in order to account for them, that is, a set of independent and coherent axioms, then the practices produced according to perfectly conscious generative rules would be stripped of everything that defines them distinctively as practices, that is the uncertainty and 'fuzziness' resulting from the fact that they have as their principle not a set of conscious, constant rules, but practical schemes, opaque to their possessors, varying according to the logic of the situation . . .
  The reason the term structure poses such problems is that it has two uses — passively to describe an arrangement (a structure) and actively to describe the directionality of a process (to structure) — which are often conflated in archaeological analysis. The arrangements of things and institutions (objectified structures) do not produce other structural arrangements of things and institutions (kinship structures do not produce religious structures, nor indeed do social structures produce a structural pattern in the archaeological record). If they did, then the passive structure would become mysteriously active and mysteriously determinate in the 'evolution' of social and symbolic systerns. Again, it is difficult to see from such a perspective how things would ever change. The arrangements of things are certainly conditions which people have to use, but they do so according to their own levels of knowedgeablity, their own strategic intentions, and their general practical ability to inhabit the world around them. It is the latter which are the active structuring processes and which contain the essential indeterminacy of history. Human practices thus move between the different structural arrangements and in doing so they give them meaning and life by reproducing them through time.
  If we are to continue to use the term 'structure' in a sociological sense we must do so with greater care and distinguish between conditions and process. It is from this perspective that we hope our call for the vulnerablity of analogy becomes clear. Universals are always vulnerable when we move from their abstract formulation and return them to the real conditions of history (cf. Sayer 1987). It is surely an understanding (rather than an explanation) of those real conditions which archaeology should seek. If the 'experiment' of the southern British Neolithic were to be re-run it is unlikely that Stonehenge would be built in the form it was, where it was, and when it was a second time, although some other material expressions of a dominant ideology probably would exist. That is to say, history can be understood but not predicted because the latter demands a determinacy which does not exist.
  We are therefore calling here not for an archaeology of meaning and of symbolic systems whereby we claim to have discovered what Stonehenge meant, but for an archaeology of inhabitation and practice which explores the ways in which meanings were constructed and symbolic systems reworked and adapted to viewpoints, experience and the passing claims of social convention. In such an archaeology the meaning of Stonehenge becomes more ambiguous and more open. The reason for this is that the metaphorical associations by which Stonehenge was known depended not upon the momentary juxtaposition of a single ancl closed sel of symbolic equivalents and oppositions,
851
but upon the ability of the inhabitants to set the monument in a number of different path ways between the memories of earlier experiences and their future prospects in establishing some control over the world and over others around them. The context in which Stonehenge becomes comprehensible is therefore the context of historical practices and not the context of an ahistorical system of signs.
  There are a number of positive implications for the analysis of the Stonehenge landscape in what we have outlined here. The emphasis upon practice, a genuine attempt to elicit practice as the necessary part of any analysis addressing structural history, returns us to the central issue of time. Places are linked not only spatially but also temporally and movement within the landscape will have created different narratives of interpretation. We can think again about the ways in which architecture structures movement and perception, about the ways in which the complex buildings of the 3rd millennium may represent the constant modification but also transformation of basic principles of movement, about the ways architectural traditions enhance and transform positions of social status, about the ways different patterns of experience (between agricultural labour and ceremonial display for example) may harmonize with the temporal cycles of the seasons, about the ways relationships between the living, dead and ancestors are constructed in narrative and movement in which burial rites play a crucial role. It is in thinking about these different temporalities that we encounter the spaces and ambiguities which allowed for a rethinking of the world and the strategic appropriation of certain symbolic resources by newly emergent forrns of political authority. We note that PP&R give little indication of the ways the landscape architecture of the 3rd millennium reworked that of the 5th and 4th millennia and that they further imply that the burial rites of [he 2nd millennia were simply doomed to repeat the same 'structuring principles' which governed the earlier periods rather [han contribute to the transformation of the symbolic conditions out of which the Bronze Age was created (cf. Barrett 1994).
Acknowledgements. We are grateful to Richard Bradley, Robert Layton and Melanie Giles ror commenting on this note prior (o its submission.
References
BARRETT, J.C. 1994. Fragments from antiquity: An archaeology ofsocial life in Britain c. 2900—1200 BC:. Oxford: Blackwell.
BINFORD, L.R. 1967. Smudge pits and hide smoking: the use of analogy in archaeological reasoning, American Antiquity 32: 1-12.
1980. Willow smoke and dogs' tails: hunter—gatherer settlement systems and archaeological site formation, American Antiquity 45: 4—20.
BLOCH, M. 1995. Questions not to ask of Malagasy carvings, in I. Hodder, M. Shanks, A. Alexandri, V. Buchli, J. Carmen, J, Last & G. Lucas (ed.), Interpreting archaeology: finding meaning in the past: 212—15. London: Routledge.
BOURDIEU, P. 1990. The logic of practice. Trans. R. Nice. Cambridge: Polity.
CLARKE, D.V., T.G. COWLE & A. FOXON (ed.), 1985. Symbols of power at the time of Stonehenge. Edinburgh: Her Vlajesty's Stationery Office.
DE WAAL MALEFIJT, A, 1968. Religion and culture. New York (NY): Macmillan.
EVANS-PRITCHARD, E.E. 1937. Witchcraft, oracles and magic arnong the Azande. Oxford: Clarendon Press
FOX, R. 1967. Kinship and marriage. Harmondsworth: Penguin GEERTZ, C. 1973. Thick description: towards an interpretive theory of culture, in C. Geertz, The interpretation of culture: 3—30. London: Hutchinson.
GIDDENS, A. 1984. The constitution of society: outline of a theory of structuration Cambridge: Polity Press
GOULD, R.A. (ed.). 1978. Explorations in ethnoarchaeology. Albuquerque (NM): University of New Mexico Press.
HODDER, I. 1982. The present past: an introduction to anthropologyfor archaeologists. London: Batsford.
1990. The domestication of Europe. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
LAYTON, R. 1992. Ethnographic analogy and the two archaeological paradigms in S. Goldsmith et al. (ed.), Ancient images: ancient thought: the archaeology of identity: 211— 21. Calgary: Archaeological Association, University of Calgary. Proceedings of the 23rd Annual Chacmool Conference.
LÉVI-STRAUSS, C. 1963. Structural anthropology. Trans. C. Jacobson & B.C. Schoepf. New York (NY): Basic Books,
PARKER PEARSON, M. & RAMILISONINA. 1998. Stonehenge for the ancestors: the stones pass on the message, Antiquity 72: 308-26.
SALMON, M.H. 1982. Philosophy and archaeology. New York (NY): Academic Press.
SAYER, D. 1987. The violence of abstraction: the analytic foundations of historical materialism. Oxford: Blackwell.
STEADMAN, L.B., C.T. PALMER & C.F. TILLEY. 1996. The universality of ancestor worship, Ethnology 35: 63—76.
SWANSON, G.E. 1964. The birth of the Gods: the origin ofprimitive beliefs. Ann Arbor (MI): IJniversity of Michigan Press.
UCKO, P.J. 1969. Ethnography and archaeological interpretation of funerary remains. World Archaeology 1 (2): 262—77.
WYLIE, A. 1985. The reaction against analogy, in M.B. Schiffer (ed.), Advances ill archaeological method and theory B: 63—111. New York (NY): Academic Press.

People and the diverse past: two comments on 'Stonehenge for the ancestors'
ALASDAIR WHITTLE*YELLEN, I.E. 1977. Archaeological approaches to the present: models for reconstructing the past. New York (NY): Academic Press.

The richly textured paper on Stonehenge by Mike Parker Pearson & Ramilisonina (1998) develops exciting new ways of looking at Stonehenge and other stone monuments, drawing on analogies from Madagascar and elsewhere to elaborate the importance of ancestors in kinship-based societies. The presentation of practices and beliefs related to ancestors in parts of Madagascar is particularly powerful. Their Neolithic model gains extra credence by being applied not only to Stonehenge but also to the Avebury complex. In the latter case, I find their suggestion of a parallelism in layout between Avebury and the West Kennet Avenue on the one hand and West Kennet palisade enclosure 2 and Outer Radial Ditch 1 plus Structure 4 on the other, very convincing. That relationship may just have been reinforced by the recognition this year by RCHME on aerial photographs (Bob Bewley pers. comm.) of another outer radial ditch leading from Palisade Enclosure 2 to another circular external structure, on more or less the same alignment as the first set. The recognition of a social setting for these monument complexes and traditions different to that envisaged in chiefdom models is also very welcome.
  One measure of the success of the paper is the number of questions it raises. In the space available here and in a spirit of appreciation, I want to raise two questions. Should we exclude people from Stonehenge and Avebury in the manner outlined by PP&R, and do we use sufficiently varied concepts of ancestry in general

* School of History & Archaeology, Cardiff University, PO Box 909, Cardiff CFI 3xU, Wales.
Received 30 September 199B, accepted 6 October 1998.
ANTIQUITY 72 (1998): 852—4
848	NOTES

NOTES

NOTES

