                              Stonehenge
                              by R. S. NEWALL


J
    OHN WEBB, in his preface to Inigo Jones’s posthumously
     published Stonehenge, in 1655 says : ‘ This discourse of Stonehenge
     is moulded off and cast into a rude Form, from some few
indigested notes after the late judicious Architect, the Vitruvius of his
Age, Inigo Jones ’. Upon these notes, Webb undoubtedly dined not
wisely but too well and I trust I shall not be accused of doing the same
with Colonel Hawley’s many and well digested notes. I have one
advantage over Webb in that I have seen Stonehenge, and I very much
doubt whether he had.
      In describing the stones, I shall begin at the centre and work
outwards, taking as centre the point where a line drawn from stone 91
just inside the bank to stone 93, and a line from hole 92 in the middle of
the supposed barrow to hole 94 in a similar barrow in the NW quadrant,
cut each other and the axis of Stonehenge. It is from this point as
centre that all the black circles on the plan are drawn. The axis is a
line through the centre, which divides the stones and earthworks into
two equal parts.
      The stones already mentioned are as follows. No.91 is a rough,
somewhat pointed stone, now leaning outwards. No. 93 is much
smaller and is dressed on all four sides. Both of them lie 140 feet from
the centre. Hole 92 was dug into by Hoare ; he found nothing there,
but mentions finding a cremation burial in hole 94. It is, however,
more probable that he dug out ‘ Aubrey ’ hole 46, as will be shown later.
      These four points could not have been exactly fixed after Stonehenge
was standing, but their intimate connexion with the plan of the monu-
ment suggests that they were fixed just before its erection. The only
other stone circle that has outlying stones, other than an avenue, is
Turusachan, Callernish, but there the stones are in a different position as
regards the avenue and the north.
      The centre of the circle having been defined, the next stone to be
considered is no. 80 (red, stippled), which is I 6 feet long by 3 feet 4 inches
wide and I foot 9 inches thick, and is at present pressed into the ground
                                      75
                             ANTIQUITY
by the weight of stones 5 5 and 156, which have fallen on the top of it.
This is the only piece of micaceous sandstone at Stonehenge and
fragments of it are rare. Its original position is uncertain, but it is
more than probable that it does not now stand in it. The northern end
is more or less pointed, the southern has been dressed flat. In nearly
every case where the base of a stone is exposed, it is found to be naturally
pointed and left undressed. A pointed base would be helpful in raising
a stone to the perpendicular, for it could be inclined one way or another
more easily than if the base were flat. T o flatten a pointed base would
also reduce the height of the stone, and the intention of the builders
seems to have been to get the greatest possible height out of the material.
If, however, stone 80 did stand upright in a position on the axis, it must
have fallen in such a way that the middle of it lies directly over its hole ;
and if, on the other hand, it stood in a hole somewhere near the present
position of the base, that is, off the axis, one would expect to find its
pair.
       Outside stone 80 lies the horse-shoe of blue stones (blue), nos. 61
to 72, some of which stand on the arc of a circle with a radius of 19 feet.
They are all of spotted dolerite, and increase in height from no. 61,
which is now 5 feet 6 inches but must have been a little more originally,
to over 8 feet where they stand near the axis. Stone 67, which stands
on the axis, would seem to render useless any viewpoint behind it. All
these stones are very carefully dressed and taper gradually from the
ground to the flat top. No. 68 differs from the others in having a
shallow vertical groove on its northern side, but this is due to the stone
having been dressed by cutting a groove and then pounding down the
ridges, as is shown on the outside face of no. 59. I t has been suggested
 that this horse-shoe was originally an oval, but there do not seem to be
enough holes on the northeast side.
       The five big trilithons nos. 51-60 (pink) are the most impressive
stones here, but, though large, they are not nearly so large as some
stones moved by prehistoric men. The broken menhir at the end of
 the long barrow, called Er-Grah, at Locmariaquer in Brittany has a
 total length of 67 feet, whereas the largest stone at Stonehenge, no. 56,
 is only 29 feet 8 inches, of which 8 feet are below ground. The
 trilithons increase in height towards the centre: 51 and 52 are 16 feet
 6inches in height, 53 and 54 (plate I) are 17feetginches,and 55and 56are
 22 feet. The last mentioned stones were probably the first to be
 erected. When no. 56 was raised upright from a leaning position
 in 1901, it was discovered that it had been run down an incline cut in
                                     76
PLATE I




          .facing p . 76
                            STONEHENGE
the chalk to the bottom of its hole from the inside of the circle, thus
proving that the blue stones were erected afterwards, for they stand
over this incline and it would be impossible to erect the big sarsens once
they were standing there. Another point of interest in connexion with
these two stones is, that although no. 56 has 8 feet below ground, its
fellow ( 5 5 ) can only have had about 4 feet covered. The greatest
height was wanted here, and in order to get that height out of no. 5 5 ,
which is nearly 4 feet shorter than no. 56, the part below ground level
was not dressed but was left nearly twice as thick as the upper portion,
in order to give it a broad, firm base.
      The lintels of these trilithons are very carefully cut to a curve on
both the inner and the outer sides, and they are about 6 inches wider
on their upper surface than on their lower, so that they should not give
a tapering effect when seen from below. Their average measurements
are 16 feet long, 4$ to 4 feet wide and 34 feet thick. The very even
height at the top of each pair of uprights is noticeable. It would be
impossible to place pairs of stones so exactly, however carefully their
length and the depth of the holes were measured, because the crushing
effect of their weight on the chalk would be an unknown factor. In
practice, however, this difficulty could easily be met by erecting the stones
and letting them settle in their holes and then seeing how much had to
be cut off the top and how much had to be left for the tenons which
fit into the mortise holes at each end of the lintel. This use of mortise
and tenon for jointing stone seems to be unique, being a method
usually only used for jointing wood. It can have had little holding
power here, for in the cases where it can be examined in situ, as for
instance on stone 52, there is a space between the joints large enough for
 a jackdaw’s nest.
      Outside the big trilithons is the circle of blue stones, 31 to 49 and
 150, with a radius of 39 feet. The stones vary in height, shape and
 material ; besides 16 spotted dolerites there are four rhyolites and four
 volcanic ash stumps broken off below ground level. Although this
 is the least accurately placed of the circles, it must have been pegged
 out on the ground when the rest of the structure was planned, for no
 circle could be drawn once the five trilithons were standing. The
 inaccuracy can partly be accounted for by the fact that the stones were
 erected after all the sarsens were in position. That this was the order
 of erection is proved by the fact that no chips of the blue stones
 have been found in any of the holes of the sarsens which have been
 excavated.
                                     77
                               ANTIQUITY
     It is the blue stones which give us some little evidence as to when
Stonehenge was built. Dr Thomas has shown (Antiquaries Journal, 111,
239) that these stones came originally from the Prescelly Hills in
Pembrokeshire. It is almost inconceivable that rough undressed stones
should have been brought a distance of 145 miles in a straight line
overland, or round the coast by water and up the Salisbury Avon, when
plenty of stone of other kinds could be obtained quite close at hand.
The problem is partly solved by stone 150. This now lies pointing
inwards, but if it were set upright on its present NE end it would fit
exactly into the circle of blue stones, and there can be little doubt that
this was its original position. It is the only one of the blue stones known
to have mortise holes in it, and when it stood upright it was so placed
that these holes were on the outside. Now a universal feature of
Stonehenge is that the best face of a stone is always on the inside.
Therefore, it may be safely said that some form of megalithic monument
composed of Prescelly blue stones and having at least one trilithon was
brought from some place unknown and incorporated into Stonehenge
after the sarsens had been erected, and that stone 150, originally part
of a trilithon, was then used as one of the uprights of the circle of blue
stones. The stones of this circle are a rather uneven lot. Nos. 49
and 3 I , on either side of the axis, are intentionally a little nearer in than
the others. Nos. 46 and 48 are rhyolites and have 38 and 40, the only
other rhyolites, almost diametrically opposite them, which is curious.
In fact, most of the stones in this circle have astone diametrically opposite
them, which shows that the circle is more complete than one would
imagine from looking at it, for it is not likely that in every case pairs of
diametrically opposed stones would have been destroyed. Another
interesting point is that at present there is no evidence of any of the
stones in this circle having stood at the four cardinal points of the
compass.
     Blue stone fragments have been found in other parts of Wiltshire,
the two best instances being at Boles Barrow (a long barrow at Heytes-
bury) and in a round barrow near Stonehenge. William Cunnington,
writing to H. P. Wyndham in 1801 (Wilts. Archaeological Mag. XLII,
43z), after describing the big sarsen stones weighing from 28 to 200 lbs.
each and forming a ridge down the middle of Boles Barrow, adds a
note : ' Since writing the above I discover among them the Blue
hard Stone also, ye same to some of the upright Stones in ye inner
Circle at Stonehenge '. This definitely proves the presence of blue
stones in Neolithic times in Wiltshire, but not necessarily at Stonehenge.
                                      78
                            STONEHENGE
It is more likely that the blue stone in Boles Barrow is connected with
the megalithic monument of which stone 150 in Stonehenge was
originally a part. The second instance occurs in Hoare’s Ancient Wilts,I,
127,though the admissibility of this as evidence of blue stones occurring
in a round barrow has been disputed. The barrow in question was
76 feet in diameter and 3 feet high. Hoare suggests that it had been
opened earlier by Stukeley, and goes on to say : ‘ We observed a heap
of white soil which having removed we came to the primary interment
of burned bones within a fine circular cist and found a spearhead of
brass (bronze dagger) in fine preservation and a pin of the same metal
(bronze awl). I t is somewhat singular that these burned bones, a more
than usual quantity, should have been unmolested in a barrow where
there were a hundred rabbit holes. On removing the earth from the
cist, we found a large piece of one of the blue stones of Stonehenge.
In opening a fine bell-shaped barrow NE of Stonehenge, we also found
one or two pieces of the chippings of these stones ’. It is evident that
Hoare thought that the blue stone chips were contemporary with the
primary interment, and that Stonehenge must, therefore, have been
built before this barrow.
      The last circle of stones is composed of thirty dressed sarsens,
nos. I to 30 (pink), with a continuous ring of sarsen lintels, a unique
feature in stone circles. Each upright sarsen has at the top two tenons
to fit into the mortise holes at the end of each lintel where they meet
each other on the top of the upright. The levelling of the tops of sarsen
uprights was mentioned in connexion with the five trilithons, and there
is further evidence for it here. A very large number of hammerstone
chips, mostly flint, were found just below ground level around the inside
faces of stones 29, 30, I and 2. These splinters and chips were
evidently knocked off the hammerstones in reducing the height of the
sarsens and cutting the tenons. They were found on the inside because
the lintels must of necessity have been put up from the outside of the
circle, probably by rolling them up an inclined plane of earth and wood,
and when this was removed the hammerstone chips which had fallen
on the outside would have been removed also. The lintels are further
secured by their ends being toggle-or fishtail-jointed to each other.
They are cut out on the arc of a circle to fit the circle of radius 49 feet
on which the uprights stand. One of the lintels, that resting on stones
 I and 30, was thicker than the others and in order to make it level at
the top with the others the seating at each end was reduced by a few
inches.
                                    79
                              ANTIQUITY
      The uprights of this circle have been proved by excavation to have
been erected from the outside by sliding them down an inclined plane
to the bottom of the hole and then pulling or levering them upright.
Once they were upright, there seems to have been feverish haste to keep
them so by throwing packing blocks into the space between the stone
and the chalk walls of the hole. In some cases, large sarsen mauls were
used for this purpose, also rough sarsen blocks, pieces of Chilmark
limestone, and, more rarely, blocks of green sandstone. The last two
are interesting as showing that stone was obtainable nearer than the
sarsens. Chilmark or Teffont, the nearest sources of supply for this
material, are only eight miles away, whereas the Marlborough Downs,
the presumed source of supply of the sarsens, are about eighteen miles
from Stonehenge.
      The 2 and Y circles of holes (green) must now be considered, and
may be taken together. These holes are oblong in shape with sides and
ends sloping outwards ; taking 23 as a fair example they measure
33 inches deep, 70 inches long and 56 inches wide at the top, and 42
inches long and 28 inches wide at the bottom. The filling is of a redder
shade than the earth in any of the other holes here. A glance at the
plan will show that these circles differ from all the others in their
irregularity, and this shows that they were not pegged or marked from
the common centre, which would be an impossibility once the stones
were standing. They are moderately exact in their radial position, the
 radius being 64 feet for 21 and 90 feet for Y I, but there is a tendency to
pairing on the south-west, and there seems to be a break in the con-
 tinuity at Y S . Evidence of their lateness is given by the fact that they
 are the only holes which contain fragments of the blue stone on the
bottom ; there is no 28, stone 8 having evidently fallen before they were
 dug. Another proof that they were dug after the erection of the sarsen
 circle is afforded by the fact that the filled-up incline to stone 7 was cut
 into by hole 27. Apparently the only case in which anything had been
                                                          ,
 intentionally buried in one of these holes was in ~ 3 0 where   five red-deer
 antlers were found carefully laid on the bottom. Though no date or
 period can be deduced from these, it may be noted that they were
 rather less robust than those found in the bottom of the ditch.
 Fragments of pottery of every kind from the beaker onwards were found
 in these holes, but in no stratified layers, and it can be safely said that
 they had fallen in with the earth, seeing that there was similar pottery
 all round the area in which they were dug. It is only in an instance
 like Y I I , where 104 pieces of Early Iron Age pottery were found on an
                                     80
                            STONEHENGE
ashy layer or hearth at 15 inches below the ground level, or 24 where
52 pieces of a bead-rim pot were found at' 20 inches down, that any
suggestion can be made as to date ; and one is inclined to think that if
Druids ever had any connexion with Stonehenge it was here that they
may have put up some addition, to augment or bolster up their hocus-
pocus at a monument whose use, in their time, would long have been
forgotten.
     The ' Aubrey' holes, bank and ditch (orange) may be taken
together. I t is unfortunate that the crest of the bank is not shown on
the plan, but it will be found to be just outside the ditch of the ' barrow '
92, or 161 feet from the ' Aubrey ' holes centre. The bank was, of
course, discontinued at the main causeway entrance and was probably
not its full height at either of the two other causeways, to the north and
south ; here what bank there was would soon have been worn away by
modern cart-tracks. It is also unfortunate that hardly any excavations
were made in the bank. Two were begun, and soft ground was found
outside ' Aubrey ' holes 2 and 7, but owing to the lateness of the season
there was not time to finish them.
     The extreme irregularity of the ditch is a striking feature. It
appears to have been made by digging round holes (as outside ' Aubrey '
holes 24, 25, 26) and afterwards cutting away the divisions between
them. A large number (about eighty) of deer antlers, mostly picks,
were found lying on or near the bottom, as though left there at the end
of a day's work, and there is reason to believe that this ditch was never
finished and left open. I n fact, there must always have been enough
loose chalk rubble lying in it to hide the picks, or one would suppose
that they would have been taken away and used for some other purpose.
There was no evidence of occupation at the bottom, only four very small
pieces of pottery being found there. Flint flakes were numerous, many
made no doubt in cutting through natural layers of flint in the chalk, or
in whittling a flint in 'an idle moment. Two small Cissbury-type Celts
were found, but implements were extremely rare, unless the chipped
lumps or rough cores can be called implements. The whole ditch
resembled a quarry whence chalk blocks were obtained for building the
bank. Rather more than two thirds of the ditch was filled with the
chalk rubble containing the objects mentioned above, and part no doubt
had been frosted in from the sides and from the bank. The blue stone
chips were rarely found more than a few inches down in this rubble. On
top of this was found pottery of all dates from the beaker to the present
day, a large sarsen maul like those used for dressing stone, a barbed
                                     81
                                 ANTIQUITY
and tanged flint arrowhead lying next one of iron and blue stone axes ;
in fact a similar collection to that-found amongst the stones.
     T o return to the ‘ Aubrey ’ holes ;-they are so called because John
Aubrey, F.R.s., in his plan of 1 6 6 6 ~(which seems mainly based on Inigo
Jones’s plan) shows holes in this position. It is curious that some of
the holes were visible as small depressions at that date whereas there
is no surface evidence of them today. It may have been a dry summer
when he saw them, or the turf may have been eaten off by sheep. The
holes are circular, their inner edges being more sloping than the outer,
and they vary in size from a depth of 24 inches and a diameter of 30
inches to a depth of 41 inches and a diameter of 45 inches. If, as
seems probable, they are spaced out evenly on the circle, there should
be 56 of them, of which 32 have been excavated. If a diameter (orange)
is drawn through the space between nos. 55 and 56 and through that
between nos. 27 and 28, and produced north-eastwards, it will be
found to correspond with the middle of the main causeway entrance of
Stonehenge more closely than the axis does. Also, if a circle is drawn
(orange) with its centre on this diameter, 39 feet south-west from the
centre of Stonehenge, with a radius of 144 feet, it will be found to fit
the ‘Aubrey’ holes better than the circle (black) from the Stonehenge
centre, the greatest difference being 5 feet.
     The ditch of the ‘ barrow ’ 92 is not only cut in the bank of Stone-
henge but cuts through ‘ Aubrey ’ hole 19, and the ‘ barrow ’ itself
covers holes 17 and 18,showing that it is later than the ‘ Aubrey ’
holes and the bank. Its intimate connexion with the stones has already
been shown.
     The exactness of the coincidence of the ‘ Aubrey ’ holes with the
orange circle would be impossible unless the circle had been described
from the ‘ Aubrey ’ centre by the peg-and-string method before the
stones were standing. If any reliance can be placed in the plotting of
those holes not yet excavated, stone 93 would stand almost in ‘ Aubrey ’
hole 39, and will require the most careful sectional excavation at a
future date. In the same way, ‘ barrow ’ 94 should be found to cover
three or more ‘ Aubrey ’ holes. It will be remembered that Hoare,
digging here early in the 19th century, says that he found a cremation
burial in the middle of this ‘ barrow ’, but it is more than likely that he
dug into ‘ Aubrey ’ hole 46.

    * In his Monumenta Britannica (manuscript, unpublished, in the Bodleian Library,
Oxford).
                                        82
                           STONEHENGE
     As to the contents and use of the ‘ Aubrey ’ holes, twenty-three out
of the thirty-two excavated contained a cremation or part of a cremation.
In very few instances was the cremation in a compact mass, but in nearly
every case it seems to have been placed on the side of the hole near the
top and to have dribbled down to the bottom ; in no case did blue stone
or sarsen chips go down to the bottom, though sometimes they are
deep in the hole. These points, together with the lower filling of the
ditch and the position of the ‘ Aubrey ’ holes, are very strong evidence
for assuming that the holes, the ditch and, necessarily, the bank are
earlier than Stonehenge.
     In order to determine the purpose of the holes, let us take a typical
example, no. 9. The depth of this hole is 41 inches. Down to a level
of 28 inches below the turf there were found 32 sarsen chips, 56 quartzite
chips from hammerstones, and 51 blue stone chips. Signs of cremation
were met at 10 inches below the turf, and wood-ash was encountered
at 24 inches down on the inner side, continuing in a downward slope
to the opposite side and the bottom. The cremation was diffused
among the wood-ash. This was a large hole with more or less vertical
sides ; it was filled with earthy chalk rubble, there was white chalk
rubble on the inner side under the wood-ash, and a certain amount, as
is usual, on the opposite side. A peculiarity was the depth to which
the brown earth had penetrated and the finding of stone chips of all
sorts at a greater depth than usual.
     If these holes had been dug as cists for cremation burials, the
burnt bones would not have been in this scattered state ; if they had
contained stones one might reasonably expect a few packing blocks ;
also, it might be easy to get a stone into a hole 41 inches deep and 45
inches across, but to get it out would entail the clearing of all the
material between it and the side of the hole, and perhaps cutting down
one side of the hole, which would scatter the cremation still more,
supposing that it had been placed at the side of the hole against the
stone. If, however, a wooden post stood there, its gradual decay would
cause the cremation to dribble down, and stones and earth at the top
would fall in and generally reproduce the description of the hole given
above.
     The causeway must of necessity be as old as the ditch, and
undoubtedly the post-holes (orange) on it formed a barrier to block the
entrance. I t has been shown that the causeway corresponds better with
the ‘Aubrey ’ circle diameter than with the axis of Stonehenge, but the
Axis is central to the avenue ditches (pink) and the avenue banks, so
                                   83
                               ANTIQUITY
that the avenue appears to belong to Stonehenge and not to the ‘Aubrey ’
circle.
      Two stones remain to be described. No. 95 is a well worked stone,
21 feet 6 inches long, 6 feet 9 inches wide and 2 feet 9 inches thick. The
top end, which lies towards the south-west, is dressed flat. The other
end, which lies towards the north-east, is about 154feet from the centre,
and to the north of it is a hole, 10feet in diameter and 6%feet deep, in
the bottom of which was found a large flake of sarsen. On the north
side of this hole there was the impression of a stone on the rammed
chalk which must have filled the hole between the edge and the stone.
There is no doubt that this hole once held an upright stone, and
considering the symmetrical arrangement of the stones already described,
it may be fairly assumed that no. 95 formerly stood upright on its
north-east end, thus making a pair. No hole was found for it, but there
was a cutting in the chalk about 4 feet deep all round the stone : if this
represented the depth of its original hole, it would leave 17 feet 6 inches
of it above ground, in which case the total height of its fellow would
have been 24 feet. This would be a similar case to that of stones
55 and 56, where the necessary height was obtained at the expense of the
foundations of the shorter stone.
      The last stone, 96 (about 256 feet from the centre), is a rough
naturally pointed stone and bears little or no trace of dressing. A ditch
where necessary, so far as it has been excavated, seems to surround it.
A fellow stone on the other side of the axis is to be expected, although
the ditch rather negatives the idea of there being two stones, unless it
took the form of a figure 8. Another reason for there having been two
stones will be given.
      The Stonehenge end of the avenue has been mentioned ; it contains
various holes for which it is impossible to suggest a use. The discovery
of its continuation beyond the Old and New King Barrows is one of the
wonders of air-photography of which the Editor of ANTIQUITY               should
be justly proud.*
      As to the origin and purpose of Stonehenge, it has been shown that
it is of two periods. The earlier, the ‘ Aubrey ’ circle, can be compared
with Avebury, the Ring of Brogar, Stennis or other circles where there
is, or was, something in the middle, though in the present instance all
trace of the central object has been obliterated by the erection of the
big stones. If a collection of drawings of stone circles be made, it will
     *For this, see ANTIQUITY,I, 342,and the Antiquaries Journal, IV, 57, and Air
Sumey and Archaeology, 2nd edition, 1928(Ordnance Survey Office).
Re
00

 C
                             ANTIQUITY
be found that stones on a circle, called peristaliths, can‘vary in height
from 13 feet to a few inches, and as much in diameter. If Avebury be
 taken as one extreme, a barrow on Dunstable Downs, in which a circle
of fossil urchins was found, can be taken as the other, and a sequence
between these two can be found of every height and diameter. I t is
therefore rather difficult to differentiate between a stone circle and a
 cairn circle. In the last two instances given above the circle of stones
surrounded something, in the first case two smaller circles, and in the
other a burial of a woman and a child. Circles are not always necessarily
made of upright stones only ; in some the stones stand planted on an
earthen circle, or the stones may be entirely absent as in the Giant’s
 Ring at Drumho, co. Down, which has a surrounding earth bank some
 15 feet high enclosing ten acres with a dolmen at the centre, or the earth
circle at Naas, co. Kildare, which is 216 feet in diameter, having one
upright stone at the centre with an Early Bronze Age cist-burial at the
foot. I n almost every case, however, where a stone-circle has been
properly excavated, its use has been found to be sepulchral and nothing
else. The ‘ Aubrey ’ circle can be classed with these circles and,
judging by the objects found in the upper part of the ditch, its period
would be Early Bronze Age at the latest, and more probably Neolithic.
      As to the stone part of Stonehenge, which belongs to a later period,
comparisons must be made with another class of sepulchral monuments.
The following instances are given in what might be called their con-
structional order, but their chronological sequence is not yet definitely
known. They are not drawn to any one scale. West Kennet Long
Barrow (fig. I) had a peristalith, a passage entrance and a roughly
rectangular chamber. (Archaeologia, XLII, plate 14). Weyland’s
Smithy (fig. 2) was similar, but had two transepts at either side of the
inner end of the passage, and two stones, one on each side of the passage
towards the entrance but at right angles. (Antiquaries Journal, I , 293,
fig. 3). Hetty Pegler’s Tump, the Uley long barrow (fig. 3), had four
transepts and two stones at right angles to the passage. (Archaeologia
XLII,, plate 14). Camster Cairn, Caithness (fig. 4) is usually described
as tricamerated or tripartite, but in comparing it with the other examples
it will be seen that the end chamber has become more enclosed and the
four side chambers more open, and it may still be said to have five
chambers. The passage entrance is longer in proportion to the whole
and has four pairs of stones at right angles to it. (Prow. SOC. Ant. Scot.,
VI, plate 27). Ormiegill Wick (fig. 5) is like the last. It is in a
short horned cairn, but the chamber is surrounded by a circular wall of
                                    86
TRILITHON ENTRANCE TO SOUTH TRAXSEPT, LA HOUGE BIE, JERSEY
                     Ph. 1:. F. Guiton, SOC. Jer.
                 Bi, rourt=n' of the SoriAc' Jc.r.sin?sr
                             STONEHENGE
stones inside the cairn, which may be said to take the place of an inner
peristalith. (Procs. SOC.Ant. Scot.! VII, plate 62). Stoney Littleton
(fig. 6) has six transepts and two pairs of stones at right angles to the
passage. (Archaeologia, XLII, plate 14).
      How can these be compared with Stonehenge (fig. 7)? Both long
and round barrows have instances of either peristaliths or dry walls
surrounding their bases; this corresponds to the sarsen circle. The
passage entrance has become stones 30 and I , 95, 96 and their fellows.
In fig. 5 , the dotted circle shown (which is deep in the cairn,
and probably occurred in many other instances, only it is not
usually looked for after the burial chamber has been rifled), corresponds
to the blue stone circle. The transepts, now reduced to three stones
each, are the five trilithons. The best example of a trilithon entrance
to a transept is in La Hougue Bie, Jersey (plate 11), which has two
transepts and an end chamber. In none of the above instances are
there examples of dolmen idols or pillars standing free in the
central chamber. Bryn Celli Ddu in Anglesey has one and La Hougue
Bie had three though in this case they were only 18 inches high.
It may be that they are symbolic effigies of the dead, and it is
possible that the horseshoe of blue stones represented these. This
comparison with chambered cairns may be thought rather exaggerated,
since the one thing common to all these cairns is a roof; but at
Stonehenge the roof is there now, symbolically represented by the
lintels of the five trilithons and, to a lesser extent, by the lintels of the
sarsen circle.
      The cairns and long barrows seem not to have been made for single
interments but for repeated burials, the partly charred remains of
domestic animals which have been found in them being offerings to
the dead. If therefore it be granted that Stonehenge represents a
development of the chambered cairn, it may be supposed that by the
time it was built ancestor-worship had taken a more prominent part
in religion than mere offerings and worship at the actual grave, and that
this development demanded a building which, whilst retaining its
sepulchral character, should be greatly increased in size.
      It may be objected that the jump from a chambered cairn a few
feet high to Stonehenge, which is over 20 feet in height, is too great,
but intermediate forms may possibly be provided by wooden structures,
the archaeology of which is as yet only in its infancy. A wooden
structure has been found in a long barrow in Wor Barrow, and Bleasdale
seems to be a wooden circle (Trans. Lams. &' Cheshire Antiq. Soc., XVIII).
                                     87
                            ANTIQUITY
Woodhenge, which has not yet been published, is undoubtedly similar
to Stonehenge and may have had eight trixulons, if such a word can be
allowed.
     Nothing has been said as yet about orientation. That Stonehenge
was orientated towards the sunrise at the summer solstice is a fact.
That any data can be deduced from that fact is doubtful, and for any
further evidence to be got from it, one must wait until the orientation
of chambered cairns, either long or round, is firmly established and
explained. The intentional orientation of Stonehenge is confirmed
by the fact that the axis does not coincide with the middle of the
causeway. Had orientation been of no importance, one would
suppose that the stone circle would have been so built that its axis
would correspond to the middle of the existing causeway of the older
‘Aubrey ’ circle.
     As to when Stonehenge was built, it must be frankly admitted that
any definite date is at present beyond our knowledge. Even a period
in the Bronze Age is suggested with diffidence and must be received
with caution. The ‘ Aubrey ’ circle cannot be later than the earliest
period of the Bronze Age, and may belong to the end of the Neolithic
Age. That Stonehenge was built after the ‘Aubrey ’ circle is certain, and
it appears to be closely associated with several barrows of the Middle
Bronze Age. If it is true that chips of the blue stone were found in
two of these barrows, then Stonehenge must be earlier than them. We
are thus left with the end of the Early Bronze Age or the beginning of
the Middle Bronze Age, to which a comparative date of about 1500 B.C.
may be given.
     Of the many post-holes (black) shown on the plan and not yet
 mentioned, nothing definite can be said. In two cases a shallow grave
 had been cut between two post-holes ; no objects were found in them
 and the remains have been classed as Early Iron Age or later. The
 holes (dotted blue) at the inner ends of the inclines to the outer blue
 stones on the north-east, may be connected with the ‘ Aubrey ’ circle.




                                   88
