Stonehenge for the ancestors:
the stones pass on the message
M. PARKER PEARSON & RAMILISONINA*
ANTIQUITY has had a long tradition ofpublishing pieces on Stonehenge, represented in our cover design. Here we present an intriguing and thought-provoking paper, which draws an analogy with Madagascar to help explain the meaning of the enigmatic monument.
Key-words: Stonehenge, Avebury, timber circle, henge, Madagascar, analogy, ancestor

Megalithic stone monument construction in Madagascar has close associations with the honouring of the ancestors. Through the use of probability, piecemeal and relational analogies, and a consideration of the materiality of stone, a case can be made for certain structuring principles linking the ancestors with stone and the living with wood which can be found, in their own specific manifestations, to be relevant to historical and contemporary Madagascar and to Late Neolithic Britain. As a result Stonehenge can be interpreted as belonging to the ancestors, a stone version for the dead of the timber circles used for ceremonials by the living. By extension, Avebury and many other stone monuments of this period can be understood as built for the ancestors in parallel to the wooden monuments constructed for the living.
Introduction
That most enigmatic monument on Salisbury Plain continues to resist our attempts at understanding whilst, at the same time, it provides fertile ground for countless speculations and theories from all corners of archaeology's broad church. It has been conceived of as an astronomical observatory, a computer, and a centre of earth energies amongst many other interpretations (Hawkins 1966; Hoyle 1966; Chippindale 1983; Chippindale et al. 1990). All of these notions are grounded in some way or another in our own British and western 20thcentury concerns and imaginings of Late Neolithic and Early Bronze Age society, as a distorted mirror ofthe present (Ruggles 1997). There have been attempts to draw on the knowledge of monumental architecture in traditional societies in other parts of the world, such as Colin Renfrew's use of Polynesian analogies of chiefdom organization to explain the conditions which gave rise to Stonehenge's construction (1973). With the full publication of excavations at Stonehenge (Cleal et aL 1995) and the publication of other volumes on the monument (Cunliffe & Renfrew 1997; Bender 1998), we should now be in the best position to think about the meanings embodied in the megalithic architecture of Stonehenge and associated monuments in Wessex (Barrett 1997). We may well be able to say much about how the monument was erected (Startin & Bradley 1981; Richards & Whitby 1997) but there is no satisfactory overall view as to why it was built.
* Parker Pearson, Department of Archaeology & Prehistory, University of Sheffield, Sheffield SIO 2TN, England. Ramilisonina, Musée d'Art et d'Archéologie, Université d'Antananarivo, BP 564, Madagascar.
Received 27 February 1998, accepted 13 March 1998.
ANTIQUITY 72 (1998): 308—26  The perspectives of indigenous scholars on their colonial and pre-colonial pasts have been a welcome and significant development in recent years (e.g. Gathercole & Lowenthal 1989; Layton 1989a; 1989b), yet there has been little opportunity for such commentary on the archaeological remains of the European heritage. At the 1986 World Archaeological Congress in Southampton, there was a relatively informal move to do so with Edward Matenga from Zimbabwe providing an alternative view of the Avebury monuments. Such an approach has also been possible through the preparation of a television documentary on Stonehenge in which both of us participated (FIGURE 1). Not only have we been working together on issues of monumentality in Madagascar since 1991 but Ramilisonina has lived his life in communities which regularly erect standing stones and which have a complex knowledge and understanding of stone's symbolism and significance. 1
Ethnographic analogy: wood and stone Analogy can be considered to work in four different ways: as formal or piecemeal analogy; as cross-cultural generalization; as relational analogy between structuring principles in different societies; and as analogies of materiality, appreciating the physical tangibilities of the world as experienced. Each schema has its contribution to make in developing an appreciation as to what is the most appropriate understanding of monumental stone architecture in Late Neolithic/Early Bronze Age Britain.
  Formal analogies between present-day societies and the remains from the past are generally predicated on the notion that precise parallels can be drawn between the two. As a result, these types of analogy are often limited to relatively simple observations. In this particular case there is a formal analogy between contemporary Madagascar and Neolithic Britain in the erection of standing stones by both societies. Throughout Madagascar, stones, known as vatolahy ('man stones'), are erected in many places in many different circumstances. These vatolahy are explicitly identified with ancestors. Despite the occurrence of standing stones in both societies, the problems of extending this formal analogy are self-evident: Madagascar cannot be conceived of as a society parallel to that which existed in Britain over 4000 years ago. There is, of course, no monument in Madagascar which provides a direct comparison for Stonehenge. We cannot take any single Malagasy social context, such as the belief that the hardness of stone constitutes the essence of men as opposed to women, and present it as the mirror image of prehistoric Wessex. And yet the power of analogy opens avenues of new understanding, enabling us to explore the articulation of links between stone and ancestors, and perhaps uncover the expression of such links in the megalithic architecture of Britain.
1 Ramilisonina is Bezanozano and many of the observations and sayings used in the text derive from this ethnic grouping.

FIGURE 1. Raniilisonina at Stonehenge during filming. (Photo M. Parker Pearson.)
  We employ cross-cultural generalizations as a means of assessing the likelihood of certain aspects of social organization being shared between different cultural contexts. We may define these generalizations as probability analogies since they work on the principle that, if a certain relationship is found amongst most traditional societies today, then there is a probability that this relationship probably obtained in most societies in the past. A related approach can be termed the 'social typology analogy'. An example of this is Renfrew's use of social evolutionary typologies for characterising Late Neolithic Wessex as a chiefdom on the basis of matching certain archaeologically visible traits with a list of social traits which are deemed indicative of ethnographically documented chiefdoms (Renfrew 1973; Service 1962; Sahlins & Service 1960; Earle 1991). Criticized for its 'catch-all' definitions (Whittle 1997 a: 147), the chiefdom model is not particularly pertinent to this investigation since monumentality in Madagascar is not restricted to 'chiefdom' societies; indeed, in the southem lands of Androy, megalithic funerary architecture only commenced after the collapse of chiefly authority (Parker Pearson et al. 1996).
  Cross-cultural generalization is relevant in one area, that of the social significance of ancestors, a phenomenon found in many societies. Formal worship of ancestors is a feature of many societies, primarily in East Asia (Watson & Rawski 1988; Ahern 1973: Chidester 1990: 125—36). Lehmann & Myers claim that a universal belief in the immortality ofthe dead exists in all cultures whilst Steadman, Palmer & Tilley have revised Swanson's results to argue that ancestor worship is a universal aspect of religion (Lehmann & Myers 1993; Steadman et al. 1996: 63—4; Swanson 1964). They include ghosts, spirits and ancestral totems as ancestors and define worship broadly as reverence or respect and cast doubt on the conclusion of Swanson's cross-cultural study that, in 24 out of 50 societies, dead ancestors do not influence the living (Steadman et al. 1996). Although we might question the merits of defining ancestor worship so loosely and also retain a scepticism of both the sample size and the ethnographic basis of such knowledge, Steadman et al.'s study highlights the power of tradition in kinship-based societies in which 'the way of the ancestors' provides an unquestioned authority and truth. The role of the ancestors is very marked throughout the many ethnic groups within Madagascar (Mack 1986). Cross-cultural generalization thus suggests that the people of Late Neolithic Wessex would have engaged in particular relationships with their ancestral dead,
  We may consider a relational analogy as that which links different manifestations through a common structuring principle. Hodder's work on the notion of pollution and purity in structuring relationships between men and women shows how different material outcomes stem from the same underlying ideas in Moro and Mesakin Nuba society, and in British Gypsy society (1982). Hodder is never clear as to whether his structuring principles have crosscultural universal validity; if so, then it is hard to see exactly how his notion of relational analogy differs from the laws of human behaviour presupposed by the probability analogy. It is better to assume that structuring principles are
& 
not universal and to work on the assumption that we require a certain level of inter-contextual analysis in order to establish whether they are relevant for the purposes of analogy. In this particular case, looking at Madagascar and prehistoric Wessex, we have standing stones as the main formal analogy. We know from crosscultural generalizations that ancestors are an intrinsic part of the social world in many kinship-based societies. In Madagascar, the ancestors are associated with standing stones in an intimate relationship with complex meanings. If we take this entwined co-presence of stones and ancestors to be a structuring principle, we can examine its different manifestations in the Later Neolithic and Bronze Age as compared to Madagascar. The manifestations will be specific to each cultural context and what is required for the relational analogy to work is a demonstration that the archaeological facts of Neolithic Wessex can be read acceptably in terms of the structuring principle of stones and ancestors. In other words, we need to construct a hermeneutic bridge between the analogy and the data. Another structuring principle might be the concept of worship of the sun and the moon, linked with ancestors, made visible through monumental constructions. We are now able to explore prehistoric Wessex for itself rather than placing Madagascar's known present and recent past lock, stock and barrel into the long-forgotten past of Britain.
  There is a further reason why we consider this relational analogy of stone for the ancestors, explored below, as more than just a plauSible 'just-so' story. Whilst the meanings of things can be arbitrary and open to continuous reinterpretation, the physical properties of materials such as stone, wood, water and fire are such that they resist certain interpretations and understandings and invite others. In such cases, their materiality may be a significant element of their metaphorical associations. In comparison to wood, stone has physical properties of durability, hardness, solidity and weight, the latter implying unity in the physical labour of moving a large stone. In terms of materiality, as opposed to linguistics, the sign is not arbitrary. Stone's durability and enduring nature places it at a different temporal level to the lifetimes of wood or people. Monuments of stone transcend the transience inherent in more perishable materials such as vegetal matter and wood. 2 They express the eternal in material form. This concern with materiality has been recently raised in the context of the British Neolithic and Bronze Age (Richards 1996; Tilley 1996: 168; Whittle 1997b: 152) and Whittle has even suggested that stone may have stood metaphorically for the ancestors at the time of Stonehenge (1997b: 152). This is a relationship which we can now consider in more detail through the examination of the use of stone in Madagascar.
Madagascar: ancestors and stones
Madagascar is twice the sizc of the British Isles. Subsistence practices vary enormously from wet rice cultivation in the central highlands and on the north and east coasts, to hunting and gathering in the forests of central southern Madagascar, to dry agriculture in the west, to semi-nomadic pastoralism in the arid south and southwest. There is also considerable diversity in political histories, from the formation of the Merina and Betsileo states in the highlands in the 17th and 18th centuries to the replacement of chiefdom societies by egalitarian yet hierarchical (in terms of clan organization) communities in Androy in the south. 3 Whilst Malagasy language and certain broad conceptions about house organization and orientation, cattle symbolism and economy, and ancestral respect are shared, Madagascar is a cultural mosaic of regional and ethnic interpretations and reworkings of these central themes. In spite of ecological and social organizational differences, the many ethnic groups in Madagascar are united in sharing cultural practices centred on elaborate funerals, monumental funerary architecture, and recognition of the power of the ancestors. It is the island of the ancestors (Mack 1986).
The significance and use of standing stones Stone has been a fundamental component of tombs in the highlands since the 14th century
2 We also need to bear in mind that. as we shall see, wood can stand in for stone in certain contexts. Equally, earth can also be considered as durable and enduring; in Maclæ gascar, for example, il is sacred like stone.
3 The Tandroy, the inhabitants of Androy, have a fiercely egalitarian ethos yet the structuring ol' asymmetrical marriage alliance relations between wife-givers and wife-takers produces a series of hierarchical relationships between the differen[ clans and between lineages within the clans. For societies ot- this type, the simple distinction between egalitarian and ranked is 1101 sufficient to describe lheir social structure.
AD (Lebras 1971; Joussaume & Raharijaona 1985: 540) though stone tombs have only been constructed in areas such as Androy since the mid 19th century (Parker Pearson 1992; Parker Pearson et al. 1996). Traditionally, houses in the highlands were constructed of wood and other perishable materials, They were never built out of stone since this was reserved solely for the housing and commemoration of the dead. Similarly, in Imerina (the dominant kingdom in the highlands) soil was considered to have sacred properties and, though it belonged to the king, even he could not build his house out of it. This material symbolisrn began to change in the 1870s in the highlands when Welsh Protestant missionaries encouraged the building of houses in brick and stone. Today the distinction between wooden houses and stone tombs is still strongly maintained by the Tandroy in the region of Androy.
  Standing stones are known as vatolahy ('man stones') and are erected for many reasons (FIGURE 2). Traditionally, stone is reserved for the dead in the form of tombs and commemorative standing stones but the extent and nature of the association of standing stones with the dead varies from region to region. 4 For highland groups such as the Bezanozano, a vatolahy may represent a deceased individual or group of dead (Ndema 1973: 168—74). The stone is put up after death to commemorate a man whose body has not returned to his ancestral tomb or, alternatively, to celebrate a well-known indi vidual who is buried in his ancestral tomb. Very occasionally a gifted wise woman will be similarly commemorated though normally all women, and men under 30 years, are excluded from this honour. Among the Tanosy of the southeast, the va[olahy are erected at a short distance from hidden forest tombs. For the Tandroy, they are incorporated in the tombs of men at the east and west ends except when they are erected in isolation as cenotaphs to men or as the result of ancestral visitation in dreams (FIGURE 3). Standing stones are also used to mark the boundaries of different groups' territories,
4 In certain regions where stones are not available, the hardest of woods are used for standing 'stones' (va[oluhy hazo; 'wooden man stones'). The [ree named ambora is used for symbolic stones in eastern Madagascar by groups such as [he Belsimisaraka, [he Bezunozano, the Tsimihety ancl the  where it is, like stone, reserved the ancestors.
or to deflect the malign influence of a tomb whose position with respect to a house or village might affect the living. In Imerina stone came to have a legitimatory purpose in inaugurating and underwriting the establishment of state power in the 18th century. The great king Andrianampoinimerina's succession to power was established, in part, through his procession to three sacred stones in 1787 (Kus & Raharijaona in press). Kings erected stones as a mark to show that they had passed that way. Standing stones were used to mark important events such as the
& 
FIGURE 2. A standing stone (vatolahy) in the highland region of Betsileo country. (Photo M, Parker Pearson.)
FIGURE 3. A Tandroy tomb with vatolahy at its east and west ends. (Photo M.
Parker Pearson.)
winning or losing of a battle. Within the kingdom of Imerina, royal palaces and residences were linked by lines of standing stones along which messages would pass; a runner would wait at each stone to pass on the message.
  The association of stone with the passing on ofmessages has a deeper, polysemous meaning, expressed in one of the many metaphorical proverbs: vato namelan-kafatra Cthe stone passes on the message'). The commemorative stone is a text which informs about the person remembered. It is also the nexus of communications and exchanges between living and ancestors. Requests for supernatural help can be made to the ancestor at his stone. If the request is followed by good luck, the living leave gifts at the stone for the benevolent ancestor. In Bezanozano and Betsimisaraka country vaiolahy are occasionally wrapped in white lamba (shawls) in response to communications from the ancestor to the living. Standing stones may also bring good fortune or grant wishes in other ways, by touching them for example, The asking of the ancestors' blessing prior to ceremonies of circumcision, marriage and famadihana (secondary burial) may also be directed to a standing stone or tomb though it is more normally requested from the living elders. The stone's passing on of messages also refers to the position of the elders who are metaphorically like stones, passing on the messages of the ancestors to the young. This links to a further metaphor in which human growth, especially that of males, is a process of hardening. 5 Babies are soft and fluid, like water, and dead infants are excluded from the ancestral tomb. Male circumcision is a significant stage in men's process of hardening, culminating in death when, as ancestors, people become hard, resistant and eternal. Tombs must also be hard, coherent and dry. If the tomb becomes unsound and is breached, its integrity is threatened by the entry of water and damp: if the ancestors become wet, their angatra ('ghosts') cry out. Finally, stone is not only eternal but it is also binding: izay mitambatra vatofa izay misaraka fasika; fa ny firaisana no hery ('as stone we are united but as sand we arc separated; there is strength in togetherness'). Va[olahy actually embody this concept in the very activity of their quarrying, moving and erection since many people are required to act together in unison.
  In summary, stone has a number of important associations which are mobilized slightly differently among the various ethnic groups of Madagascar and which have become modified in different ways through time. Yet there are
5 Certain hardwoods, [he valanirana and the arahara, are also linked 10 [he process of masculine and ancestral hardening. A song containing [he words arahara tsy zanakazo dilony avy ('the arahara is not baby wood but is always hard') is sung at Antembahoaka circumcision ceremonies and at Bezanozano funerals, emphasising the hardening of both men and the dead. Tcza, the hardwood beneath the sapwood, has similar connotations (Bloch 1995a: 1995b).
certain coherent themes which have endured for over 500 years across the mosaic of the many ethnicities. These are the association of stone with the ancestors (for tombs and standing stones), the metaphorical hardening of the living to become like stone, the eternal durability of stone, and the unity symbolized by stone and mobilized in its erection.
Ancestors in Madagascar
Ancestors continue to inhabit the world of the living, though predominantly within their tombs or at the vatolahy. They are one of four sets or entities which may be found in most parts of Madagascar: Zanahary (the creator), Andriamanitra (God — a recent Christian concept), the razana (the ancestors), and other invisible spirits such as Vazimba (the original inhabitants of Madagascar), kalanoro and zazavavy-ndrano. Spirit possession is a feature of life in Madagascar and the living may be possessed by the spirit of an ancestor as well as by the other supernatural forces. Spirits inhabit the trees, the hills, the grass, the earth and the animals — all is sacred. Before breaking the ground for use as a rice paddy, prayers to the spirits are necessary for permission to be given. 6
  Places where the ancestors may be contacted, other than at the tombs and vatolahy, are located within three spatial scales: the house, the village and the territory. The northeast corner of the house, the jorofirariazana, where the sun rises, is the corner of the ancestors. The ancestors may be approached in the northeast corner only during the morning when the sun is in that direction, except in the afternoon of the day before a famadihana when the dead are requested to be present for the next day. In many regions, villages have sacred places at their centre, marked by a small stone, a bush or a pointed post, where the ancestors can be approached, thanked and sacrificed to. At the territorial level of large lineages or clans, ceremonial gatherings are held around a pointed wooden post (or occasionally a tomb or vatolahy) on level, high ground.
  Concepts of [he relationship between living and ancestors also involve the sun and moon,
6 For groups that practice tavy (slash and burn), such as the Betsimisaraka, [he spirits' permission is required before forest clearanc:e. The summits or hills are, however, never cleared and these remain as domains of those spirits.
and the circularity that they embody in their shapes and in their movement. Life is conceived of as a circle from birth to ancestorhood (mihodinkodina ny fiainana ('life turns in a circle')) whilst the earth is considered as round and as turning in a circle. Respect for the elders is summarized in the title of grandparents: they are masoandro amambolana ('the sun and the moon') and should be respected in the same way as we respect the sun and the moon and their movements. Both sun and moon are important for the timing of ceremonial activities. Circumcision is held during the full moon while house-building and inauguration take place during the new moon. Marriages should never be performed during the 'dead' moon. Famadihana in the highlands are held between July and early October, centring on the lunar months of August and September, whereas the Tandroy forbid any activities concerned with the dead during the lunar month of September. Dancing and singing should be conducted fari-bolana ('round like the moon') and the direction of dancing is always sunwise (anti-clockwise since the turning of the sun is in the opposite direction in the southern hemisphere).
Stonehenge as a ceremonial circle of the ancestors
Alasdair Whittle's recent discussion of the meaning of Stonehenge (1997b) utilizes the example of the Zafimaniry of central Madagascar to emphasize the properties of wood as a metaphor for people and ancestral bones (1997b: 152) though he does not pursue the Zafimaniry's linking of stone with the ancestors (Bloch 1995a; 1995b). However, this is a theme which he develops separately, concluding that circular sites of this type, including the stones themselves, were connected with spirits, ancestors and the dead (1997b: 163), Whittle's observations on the possible meanings of Stonehenge are perhaps the most perceptive yet but they do not go far enough in spelling out the specific metaphorical associations embodied by Stonehenge, especially in relation to its wooden counterparts at Durrington Walls and Woodhenge (FIGURE 4).
  The recent programme of radiocarbon dating of material from Stonehenge has resulted in a reconsideration of its overall chronology and phasing. It is currently divided into three phases (Cleal et al. 1995): Phase 1 (2950-2900 BC) is the construction of a circular ring of posts (known as the Aubrey Holes) within a circular earthwork, consisting of a bank and external ditch, with openings to the south and northeast. These orientations have been tentatively associated with symbolism of the rising moon (Ruggies 1997: 225). In Phase 2 (2900-2400 BC) a large number of wooden posts were erected in the interior and at the northeast entrance. Towards the end of this phase, cremation burials were placed throughout the monument. Phase 3 (2550—1600 BC) is the period of stone construction and building of the avenue. The earliest of these stone phases is a semi-circle of Welsh bluestones 7 brought from southwest Wales and the Preseli mountains (sub-phase 3i). This was dismantled and replaced by the sarsen circle and the five sets of trilithons (sub-phase 3ii), possibly with a setting of bluestones (subphase 3iii). The bluestones were again dismantled and set up as a bluestone circle within the sarsen circle and as a bluestone oval within the trilithons (sub-phase 3iv). An arc of these bluestones was removed to form the bluestone horseshoe (sub-phase 3v). Finally, two concentric circles of stoneholes (the Y and Z holes) were dug outside the sarsen circle but they were never filled (sub-phase 3vi).
  Four radiocarbon dates from the sarsen stoneholes suggest that the sarsens were erected around 2400 BC (Allen & Bayliss 1995: 524-5), several centuries earlier than had previously been thought. The significance of this is that the major stone-building period at Stonehenge was broadly contemporary with the construction of large timber post circles within the henge enclosures at Woodhenge (c. 2500—2000 BC) and Durrington Walls (c. 2500—2100 BC) (Cunnington 1929; Wainwright & Longworth 1971). Archaeological opinion is divided as to whether these concentric circles of timber posts were roofed or simply lintelled (see Musson 1971; Parker Pearson 1993: figure 58; Gibson 1994) but the large diameter of the timber circle recently detected by magnetometry at Stanton Drew in Somerset precludes the likelihood of roofing. Whether these timber circles were roofed or not, their quantities of associated finds, especially pig bones and Grooved Ware pottery, from
7 'Bluestone' is used here as a catch-all term for all of the Welsh rocks at Stonehenge, including not only the dolerites, rhyolite, and volcanic ash or tuff but also the sandstone rocks.

FIGURE 4. Ground plans of Stonehenge (sub-phase 3vi),
Durrington Walls Southern Circle and
Woodhenge. (From Darvill 1997, courtesy of the British Academy.)
within the post circles and from the midden areas outside them are indicative of considerable activity, involving feasting and structured deposition (Richards & Thomas 1984). There continues to be much speculation about the timber circles' purpose since they are monumental in size and massively bigger than the insubstantial remains of the few Late Neolithic houses, constructed with organic materials, which have been found in southern Britain. The presence of many thousands of relatively unfragmented pig bones within these monumental timber circles has been interpreted as evidence of an élite or a priestly caste (Wainwright 1989; MacKie 1977) though many other interpretations are possible. What is particularly important here is the relationship between the timber circles and the stone circle of Stonehenge (Darvill 1997:  The structural features which link Stonehenge to the Durrington and Woodhenge timber monuments are: the six concentric rings (if we include the Y and Z holes at Stonehenge); the use of both the circle and the oval (both incorporated into the same monument at Stonehenge), the similar sizes (between 39 m and 53 m), and the solstice sunrise axes (midsummer at Stonehenge and Woodhenge and possibly midwinter at the Southern Circle at Durrington Walls).
  It has been noted for some time that the dressing of the Stonehenge stones, the provision of mortices and tenons, 9 and the use of tongue and groove joints for the lintels in the sarsen circle are reminiscent of techniques of woodworking (Atkinson 1979: 39; Gibson 1994: 211; FIGURE 5). Although the postholes of the Durrington and Woodhenge timber circles provide no indication whether these posts were similarly dressed with rectangular sections above ground, there appears to have been an intention to dress and erect the Stonehenge stones as if they were wooden. If stone was the medium associated with the ancestors (or simply the spirit world) then Stonehenge can be understood as a 'ceremonial circle' used and occupied by the ancestors (and/or spirits) in the same way that the timber circles were 'ceremonial circles' used and occupied by the living. The distinction can be followed up in three ways.
  Firstly, Stonehenge's isolation and invisibility from Durrington Walls and Woodhenge, where three timber circles are known and other circular features are inferred (David & Payne 1997: 91—4), suggests a spatial dislocation such that the ancestors occupied the same world as the
8 Coneybury henge should also be mentioned here. Lying about a mile southeast of Stonehenge, it is a small ovalditched enclosure containing a circle of posts, inside which is a circle of pits which held either stones or posts (Richards 1990: 123—58; 1991: 89—96). Despite the many stakeholes and two large pits, the quantities of Grooved Ware and other refuse were slight. Coneybury henge dates to c. 2750 BC and, prior to its abandonment, can be compared to Stonehenge in Phase 2.
9 Technically these are ball and socket joints (Alex Gibson pers. comm.).
living but were given their own distinct place within it (FIGURE 6). The two monument complexes, though separate, may have been complementary. Both are linked by the flow of the River Avon, since Stonehenge's avenue leads down to the river and Durrington Walls' main entrance faces directly onto it, Whilst further work is needed to establish whether there was an avenue leading from Durrington Walls to the river, there is evidence throughout Britain of a strong association in this period of henge monuments with rivers and streams (Richards 1996).
  Secondly, the quantities of rubbish at Stonehenge are far fewer than those from the timber circles. The Stonehenge finds assemblage includes sherds from only a few vessels and about 1000 animal bones. The 11 sherds of Grooved Ware and 229 Beaker sherds, most of them small, suggest that deposition was limited. Although we must bear in mind the inadequate retrieval methods of the early excavations and the limited depositional contexts for bones and pottery, the 3675 pieces of bluestone, 2173 pieces of sarsen and 1285 pieces of flint from the excavations suggest that the retrieved quantities of pot and bone are indicative of their restricted deposition. At Durrington Walls, the 5861 sherds of Grooved Ware and 71 Beaker sherds, and the 8500 animal bones attest to a different scale of deposition, interpreted as the remains of feasting (Wainwright & Longworth 1971: 189—90). About half of this material came from the Southern Circle and its environs. There were smaller but still significant quantities from the Northern Circle and from Woodhenge (Wainwright & Longworth 1971: 188; Cunnington 1929; Pollard 1995). The material record from Stonehenge presents us with two possibilities. Either little ceramic or faunal rubbish was discarded here or the monument was kept clean, with the refuse being deposited outside the earthwork in some place as yet unlocated. The latter interpretation is less likely, given the many thousands of pieces of stone and flint recovered during excavation. The lack of ceramic and faunal debris suggests that this ceremonial place of the ancestors was probably never the scene of feasting by the living.
FIGURE 6 (opposite). Interpretation of the Middle to Late Neolithic landscape around Stonehenge in phases 1—2. (Adapted from from Cleal et al. 1995: figures 252—4, drawn by Colin Merrony.)  Thirdly, there is an unusual visual relationship between Stonehenge and the Early Bronze
Age (c. 2200—1700 BC) round burial mounds in its vicinity (FIGURE 7). Although this part of Salisbury Plain contains one of the densest and largest groups of round barrows in Britain, only about 20 are located within Stonehenge's 'envelope of visibility' (Cleal et al. 1995: figure 21). The most impressive round barrow cemeteries, on Normanton Down, King Barrow Ridge and the Cursus, are all located so as to be just visible from Stonehenge, placed at the limits of visibility. The remainder, numbering several hundred, are placed so as to lie further outside this area of visibility from Stonehenge. This envelope of visibility' from Stonehenge provides a zone which was largely free of the physical remains of the Early Bronze Age dead except

FIGURE 5. Mortice and tenon and tongue and groove jointing at Stonehenge. (From Atkinson 1987: 16, courtesy of English Heritage.)


FIGURE 7. Interpretation of the Late Neolithic to Early Bronze Age landscape around Stonehenge in phase 3. (Adapted from from Clea] et al. 1995: figures 21, 254—5, drawn by Colin Merrony.)at its margins which we may interpret as liminal zones between the landscape of the living and the landscape of the ancestors. The world of the ancestors was thus a physical domain, a place which, for over 500 years after the Late Neolithic, was separate from the places where the physical remains of the dead were put. 10 It was also cut off from the domain of the living
10 Whilst some of the Beaker burials around Stonehenge date to the later 3rd millennium BC, we have little idea about the placing of the remains of the dead during the time when Grooved Ware was in use. The associations with water raise the possibility that corpses, defleshed skeletons
by a liminal circular zone containing the corporeal remains of the Early Bronze Age dead (Woodward & Woodward 1996).
  The living will have visited Stonehenge, no doubt, at certain moments to meet the ancestors, to communicate directly with them. Yet, outside the moments of building, the monument and its immediate surroundings were
or cremated bones were disposed of in rivers (Richards 1996). The encroachment into the ancestors' domain by round barrows may have happened towards the end of the Early Bronze Age, judging by the presence of a Collared
Urn in the barrow immediately east of Stonehenge,
probably left largely alone. In other words, in terms of human action, little or nothing happened within Stonehenge in Phase 3 other than its various periods of construction work. 11 Once built, its inhabitants were the spirits of the ancestors, using it for incorporeal feasting ceremonies and calendrical rituals which mirrored those corporeal ceremonies held by the living in the timber circles of the region, specifically at Durrington Walls.
Avebury, the West Kennet enclosures and beyond
It is difficult to talk of Stonehenge without mentioning Avebury and, if our notion has any validity, then it should be equally applicable here. Avebury is a large earthen henge with four entrances, within which is a large stone circle containing two adjacent stone circles associated with unusual stone edifices; the 'Cove' in the north circle and the 'Obelisk' in the south circle (Smith 1965; Malone 1989: figure 85). Running southeast out of the south-southwest entrance of the henge is the West Kennet avenue, a double row of standing stones which culminates over 2 kilometres away at the Sanctuary, a round building which was constructed in both timber and stone (Cunnington 1931). 12 Radiocarbon dates suggest two phases of ditch-digging between c. 3490—3280 and 3150-2630 BC (Pitts & Whittle 1992). The dating of the erection of the stones rests on two dates, c. 2840-2590 and 2510-2230 BC (Pitts & Whittle 1992) which Whittle rationalizes as falling within the period c. 2800—2400 BC (1997a: 140). Though no radiocarbon dates are available for the Sanctuary, it is considered to be broadly contemporary (Pollard 1992: 213).
  One of the most exciting discoveries near Avebury in recent years has been the complex of palisade enclosures at West Kennet, dated
11 The living, or certain persons amongst them, may have accompanied the ancestral spirits or come to meet them at particular moments but they would have needed no razor wire to keep them outside the circle and to either side of the avenue. As we will see below, a similar situation can be envisaged at Avebury where Keiller noticed slight depressions in the chalk bedrock running along either side of the West Kennet avenue (Ucko et al. 1991: 189), and where a gap in the standing stones on the southwest side of the avenue was used for the offering of stones, flint and stone-tempered pottery (Smith 1965: 210—12).
12 A second avenue, the Beckhampton avenue, was thought to have led out of the west-southwest entrance of the henge but geophysical survey has failed to reveal any certain trace of it (Ucko et al. 1991: 199).
to c. 2400—2000 BC (Whittle 1997a). Here we find a modified and smaller version of Avebury but created in wood rather than in stone (FIGURE 8). There is only a short stretch visible of an outer palisade 13 to match the outer stone ring at Avebury but otherwise the adjacent circles, the southeast-running avenue and the Sanctuary are all replicated. Spatially and structurally, the south circle at Avebury can be matched with Palisade Enclosure 1 at West Kennet, the north circle with Palisade Enclosure 2, the West Kennet avenue with Outer Radial Ditch 1 (though the latter is shorter and appears to have only the southern side), and the Sanctuary with Structure 4 (Whittle 1997a: figure 28). The Avebury Cove and the stone arrangements in the south circle may equate to the simple concentric post circles such as Structures 1, 2 and 3. Although excavations of the West Kennet complex were limited in extent, over 5000 animal bones and large quantities of Grooved Ware indicate large-scale feasting within the enclosures. 14
  Not only does the Avebury—West Kennet evidence replicate the spatial segregation of the ancestors' stone-built space from the timber domain of the living but it also provides a set of relationships similar to those for the Stonehenge—Durrington monuments. The paired circles at Avebury and West Kennet are not intervisible; both sites have a close association with water; and the distribution of round barrows is markedly sparse within a I-km radius of Avebury yet it lies within another major concentration of barrows. 15 We know relatively little
13 This is visible in one aerial photograph (Whittle 1997 a: figure 26) as a 150-m long crop-mark which appears to be a wide ditch containing large, widely spaced post-holes. Unfortunately it has not yet been investigated.
14 The animal bones are, like other timber circle assemblages, dominated by pig. More peculiarly there is a strong preponderance of right-side portions.
15 As Colin Richards has indicated (1996), water is very significant for the placing of henges. At Avebury the entry point (the Sanctuary) to the 'henge' of the ancestors lies downstream from the palisade enclosures, the 'henge' of the living, just as the beginning of the Stonehenge avenue is similarly located with respect to Durrington \Valls. However, Avebury has a potentially unique monument in the form of Silbury Hill, which intercepts passage upstream from the palisade enclosures to Avebury henge (FIGURE 8). In terms of the flow of water and spiritual procession in a counter-clockwise direction, Silbury Hill marks the transition point where death turns to life, a monument of renewal and rebirth as Whittle has suggested on other grounds (1997a: 151). Its links with rebirth were also noted by Dames (1976).

FIGURE 8. A reconstruction of the parallel stone and timber monuments at Avebury and West Kennet. (Adapted from the drawing by Josh Pollard from Whittle 1997a: figure 87 Jabout the interior of Avebury henge except that there is a dearth of pottery and animal bones that might be construed as feasting debris (Barclay et al. 1995: 113). Cunnington's extensive excavations of the Sanctuary produced little more than 80 sherds of Grooved Ware and a small assemblage of animal bones, though Potlard advises that surface accumulations could have been substantial (1992: 2'21). The geometric arrangement of post-holes and standing stones at the Sanctuary raises the possibility that wood and stone may have been in contemporary use here although it might also have begun as a timber monument and finished as a stone one (Pollard 1992). If the former is the case then we have the possibility that the Sanctuary was constructed as a place where the worlds of the living and the dead coincided, perhaps where the physical remains of the Late Neolithic dead were put, possibly immediately northwest of the Sanctuary, prior to the initiate ancestors' path up the avenue to Avebury. 16 If the latter then the Sanctuary is one of a small number of sites where wooden monuments were replaced in stone during the Later Neolithic (Pollard 1992: 218-19; Gibson 1994: 205).
  If stone constructions are for the dead as opposed to timber for the living, we can use this principle to begin to understand transformations in the use of ceremonial sites over time. Timber structures which become 'lithicized' in later reworkings may be revealing in their ma-
16 Burl (1079: '127) records an observation in 1678 by Robert Toupe, the physician who sought out human bones to grind into medicinal powden about human remains near the Sanctuary . . . soe close by one another that scul loucheth scul . I really believe the whole plaines on that even ground, is full of dead bodies', and another by John Aubrey: '/\boul 80 yards from this monument, in an exacl plain round it, there were some years ago great quantities Of human bones and skeletons dug up.'
terial form a shift in their role in the social universe. We might interpret these sites as removed from the realm of the living into the realm of the ancestors as they were remodelled schematically in stone. The West Kennet enclosures, which appear to be later than the Avebury circles, may never have reached this stage of 'lithicization' , of being transferred from the realm of the living to the realm of the dead. This was presumably because the ancestors' ceremonial site at Avebury was already in place. Likewise, the timber circles within Durrington Walls were never 'lithicized'. Stonehenge itself went through this wood-to-stone transformation between its Phases 2 and 3, significantly when it was used as a place of burial. It was precisely during this transition, and at no other time, that Stonehenge was used as a cemetery. 17 Other timber circles, such as Woodhenge and Mount Pleasant at Dorchester (Wainwright 1979), appear to have been replaced by token markers in stone. Mount Pleasant can also be regarded as potentially forming a wood—stone pair in that the timber circle (Site IV) is located adjacent to an unusual enclosure at Flagstones (Smith et al. 1997). The latter is, like Stonehenge's Phase 1, perfectly circular and, in contrast to Mount Pleasant, contains very few artefacts. Irregular hollows within the interior may have held stones.
  The configuration of Later Neolithic stone and timber monuments in Wessex was undoubtedly different to those in other regions of Britain, yet there is a possibility that the same structuring principle of stone for the ancestors was in use throughout the British Isles, albeit expressed through regional variants. For example, the change from wood to stone can be seen to have occurred in Scotland. On sites at Machrie Moor, Arran (Haggarty 1991), at Moncrieffe (Stewart 1985), Temple Wood, Argyll (Scott 1988—89), Cairnpapple (Piggott 1947—48), probably Balfarg (Mercer 1981) and Croft Moraig on Tayside (Piggott & Simpson 1971), excavations of stone rings have revealed that they replaced timber predecessors. Precisely why some wooden monuments were lithicized and others were not is not clear but we might assume
17 The Beaker burial in Stonehenge's outer ditch (Evans 1984) now looks, in this new light, suspiciously like a clandestine killing (rather than a sacrifice pace Gibson 1994: 187). He was shot in the back and, other than the arrows that killed him, is accompanied only by a wristguard.
that the conferring of ancestral status was something which was largely dependent on local human agency and regional variation. The Wessex pattern of wood-and-stone paired monuments appears to be very different to this southern and eastern Scottish example of stone-for-timber replacement. 18
  Within the Neolithic context of southern Britain we may broadly equate the use of large stones with the architecture of the ancestors, in contrast to the wooden and organic structures inhabited and used by the living. 19 The previous direct association of most Early Neolithic stone monuments with human remains, as in chambered tombs such as West Kennet, Wayland's Smithy and the Cotswold— Severn group in particular, provides us with some understanding of the contexts wherein the dead were associated with stone, a point also noted by Whittle (1997b: 163). Our general inability to locate the remains of the vast majority of the dead in the Late Neolithic presents a problem as to how that relationship between ancestors and stone might be conclusively demonstrated. Yet the prior associations between ancestors and stone provide a series of preconditions for the Late Neolithic: specific manifestations had changed, such as different means of disposal, yet there will have been threads of continuity in the more significant structuring principles of material life. Houses for the living continued to be built out of perishable materials and thus stone remained reserved for those transcendental aspects of the world associated with the ancestors. With the exception of treeless Orkney, stone was generally not incorporated into dwellings until the Middle Bronze Age. Yet not all Neolithic mortuary structures incorporate stones since many are built in regions where large stones are simply not available. In such circumstances we might expect similar solutions to those found
18 The henge at Marden in Wiltshire (Wainwright et al. 1971) contains a modest timber circle but there is no adjacent stone monument. We can only surmise that the ancestors of those celebrating at Marden were in residence at Stonehenge or Avebury.
19 It would also appear that, in the Earlier Neolithic, earth (or chalk) dug from the ground also had a certain degree of metaphorical equivalence with stone, being other materials associated with the ancestors, utilized in long-barrow construction. The ancestral significance of earth and chalk appears to have diminished in the Later Neolithic whereas that of stone was emphasized,
in the stone-free regions of Madagascar where the hardest woods are substituted for stone. We should also remember that regional adoption of stone as a medium of the ancestors will have happened at different times and rates, by recalling the chronological variations in adopting raised stones as metaphors for the ancestors in different regions of Madagascar, with a 500year gap between its adoption in Imerina and in Androy for instance.
Implications for the future
There are many avenues which the Madagascar analogy opens up, If stone was the material of the ancestors then our understanding of its modification for rock-art (Bradley 1997), its context in cave and rock-shelter burials (Chamberlain 1996) and its quarrying and shaping for stone axes (Edmonds 1995) takes on a new dimension. Equally the use of stone temper in pottery such as Peterborough Ware had ancestral associations different from Grooved Ware pots tempered with shell, grog or other materials. zo The perfectly circular forms of Stonehenge 1 and Flagstones, along with the timber circles and Stonehenge 3, are specifically features which are first found in the Late Neolithic; perfect circles are found in nature in the form of the sun and moon, the human eye 21 and ripples in still water. We would suggest that the former are more likely metaphors for the circular monuments since their correlations with solar and lunar movements are broadly accepted. Although there are no such round monuments today in Madagascar, 22 metaphors link the sun, moon and earth with respect for the ancestors
20 In this respect, we should rename Peterborough Ware and other Later Neolithic impressed wares, generally tempered with flint, cherty sandstone and quartz (Cleal 1995: 187—90), as 'ancestor ware'; pottery made for interactions specifically with the ancestors. Gibson (1995: 29) has noted that the quartz tempering probably had a deep significance whilst Thomas has recognized Peterborough Ware's contextual associations with the ancestral dead (1991: 92) and with continuity from the distant past (1991: 98). Peterborough Ware dominates the small assemblage from Avebury and the sherd scatter immediately west of Stonehenge. The large scatters of this pottery either side of the west end of the Stonehenge cursus lead us, additionally, to infer that this and other cursuses were built as pathways of initiation for the ancestors.
21 In Malagasy the sun is masoandro ('the eye of the day'). 22 Though tombs attributed to the Vazimba, the earliest inhabitants, are small circles of stones, hence the saying mitangorongorona tohaky ny Vazimba (i to be grouped tightly in a circle like Vazimba').
and with the timing of rites of passage and other ceremonials.
  The constitution of the Late Neolithic cosmological universe is also something which we can begin to explore. We are not dealing with ancestor worship as such. Our proposed model places the community of ancestors in an incorporeal world which they inhabit in a human fashion, a world parallel to the corporeal world inhabited by the living. Given existing interpretations of the timber circles as ceremonial centres, involving feasting — presumably calendrical celebration and sacrifice — and given the scarcity of bones and sherds at the stone circles, we suggest that the ancestors too were feasting and celebrating in their own intangible parallel world. This model suggests the presence of a third entity — an object of worship by all humans, living and dead. This 'third party' may have been a creator similar to the Malagasy's Zanahary but the architectural concern with precise circularity suggests that this transcendental entity was manifested in the heavenly bodies of the sun and the moon. We may invest Late Neolithic society, then, with at least two axes of transcendence, between the living and the ancestors and between people, both living and dead, and the object of their worship.
  This interpretation of stone monuments as being for, or belonging to, the ancestors throughout much of Britain during this period may cause us to question Renfrew's model of chiefdom evolution in which Stonehenge is the central place of a confederacy of powerful chiefdoms in southern Britain (1973). As we have seen from Madagascar, the putting-up of stones for the ancestors is something which is found in states, chiefdoms and relatively egalitarian communities. There is no doubt that the size of the Avebury and Stonehenge stones is greater than those erected anywhere in Madagascar and that the sustained construction of these Late Neolithic composite monuments hints at a very high level of co-operation. We might heed the Malagasy metaphorical associations between stone and unity.
  With the re-dating of the Stonehenge sarsens to c. 2400 BC, the gold-rich barrow burials of Bush Barrow, the Normanton Down cemetery and others in Britain now date to the sub-phases after the stones had been erected. With these probable 'chiefly' burials no longer dating to the relevant time frame, the copious barrow burial record of the later part of the 3rd millennium BC (associated with the Beaker period) reveals no certain social differences between individuals which might be indicative of a ranked society. Even the Beaker burials in the Cursus barrows immediately north of Stonehenge contain no exceptional collections of grave goods nor reveal any outstanding expenditure of effort in funerary rituals. Although small single items of gold occasionally appear in Beaker burials throughout Britain, these are not sufficient to indicate a chiefdom society. In fact, the funerary record of this period is far more akin to that found today amongst the competitive egalitarian Tandroy where women and children are the bread-winners whilst men are free to take part in monument construction. It may well be that the mobilization of labour for monument building in the Late Neolithic was orchestrated not by secular chiefs but by charismatic spiritual leaders and ritual specialists. In this respect, Whittle draws attention to the building of an enormous mound by the Nuer of eastern Africa in the 1890s (Whittle 1997a: 148—9). In a strongly egalitarian society, a charismatic war leader and prophet was able to mobilize the community in the construction of a great mound to bury all the bad things associated with smallpox and rinderpest (Whittle 1997a: 148—9; Evans-Pritchard 1956; Johnson 1994). What we might call egalitarian or even egalitarian yet hierarchical societies are capable of united mobilization to construct large monuments. What matters most is not the attainment of a certain level of social evolutionary complexity but the strength of the motivation and the ideology which drive people from their own volition to construct the world in new ways and build cosmic order on earth.
  Finally, Stonehenge retains some of its mysteries. Why was it constructed where it is? Why were the Welsh bluestones brought all the way from the Preselis? We can suggest some possible answers. Associations between people and land in Madagascar are very strong23 and links are maintained across hundreds of miles with the tanin 'drazan ('land of the ancestors') in both rice-cultivating and cattle pastoralist regions. Perhaps the Preseli mountains were the place of origin for the founding ancestors of the peo-
23 Tsytanymandehafa olon' belona ('it is not land which moves but people').
ple who built Stonehenge. Thus the ancestors from that place, embodied as stones, were fetched and physically incorporated into the landscape of Wessex, the new homeland. By the time that Stonehenge 1 was constructed, around 3000 BC, this part of Wessex had been the focus for much monumental activity in the form of long barrows and the Cursus. Yet Allen 's synthesis of the remarkable post-holes beneath the carpark at Stonehenge establishes that they were constructed to hold c. 0•75-m diameter pine-tree trunks in the Early Mesolithic, c. 8500— 7000 BC, about three or four millennia before even the earliest Neolithic monuments in Britain (Allen 1995; 1997). There is the possibility that more such post-holes may lie within Stonehenge Bottom, to the north of the monument, perhaps forming a ceremonial focus of some sort. Transmission of oral traditions over so many millennia is extremely unlikely but the post voids were visible as pits when Stonehenge was constructed, as indicated by their Late Neolithic/ Early Bronze Age tertiary fill (Allen 1995: 51). 24 Thus there is the possibility that these unusually ancient diggings into the land were recognized as the work of human agency belonging to a time remote from the Neolithic. In this connection, Stonehenge Bottom is unusual in being an apparently empty space lying at the centre of one of the most densely constructed ceremonial landscapes in prehistoric northern Europe. This apparent absence of features may relate not only to the 'dead zone' set apart for the ancestors but perhaps also to as yet undiscovered pre-Neolithic structures.
Conclusion
The complex metaphorical associations between ancestors and stones in different parts of Madagascar incorporate, or are linked to, structuring principles of hardness increasing with age. These are especially associated with men, with stone as a symbol of eternity and unity, and stone (and certain hardwoods) thus being reserved for the ancestors, and which signify the sun and moon and their links with elders and with rites of passage. We can use cross-cultural or probability analogies to indicate that all traditional societies place significance on the an-
24 This might seem highly improbable but we should remember that negative features from 5000 years ago can still be seen clearly on the surface. such as ditch fills at Knap Hill amongst others.
cestors and their role in the world of the living. Secondly, there is a formal analogy with Madagascar, where stones are linked to ancestors. Thirdly, relational analogies enable us to identify the structuring principles which work in both societies but to different ends. For example, the same principle can generate stones as identifiable individual ancestors in Madagascar and stones as ancestral replacements of timber in Britain, even though each outcome may be unknown in the other country. Finally, this relational analogy can be strengthened by reference to ideas about the materiality of stone as a durable and permanent marker, in contrast to the changing nature of wood, emphasizing the eternal as opposed to the transitory.
  Whereas the Madagascar case-study provides a basic analogy, it also helps to highlight specific and important differences with Neolithic Wessex. These include the identification of individual vatolahywith individual ancestors, as opposed to the Neolithic collective stone monuments which gave the ancestors a place in which to dwell and celebrate. In Madagascar the bones of the ancestors are carefully kept in the visible stone tombs where they reside, whilst in Wessex the remains of the Late Neolithic dead were disposed of and leave little trace. The ancestors appear to have inhabited places largely separate from those where their physical remains ended up.
  The efficacy of any persuasive analogy is that it not only explains the context under investigation but also opens up understanding of associated contexts. In this case, we have explained Stonehenge as a ceremonial circle built for the exclusive use of the ancestors. As a result, it appears that other stone monuments and their wooden counterparts, such as Avebury and the West Kennet enclosures, can be similarly understood as parallel ceremonial monuments, the former for the ancestors and the latter for the living. This further helps to explain the process of 'lithicization' whereby certain of the
References
AHERN, E. 1973. The cult of the dead in a Chinese village. Stanford (CA): Stanford University Press.
ALLEN, M.J. 1995. Before Stonehenge, in Cleal et al.: 41—62.
1997. Environment and land-use; the economic development of the communities who built Stonehenge (an economy to support the stones), Proceedings of the British Academy 92: 115-44.
ALLEN, M.J. & A. BAYLISS. 1995. Appendix 2: the radiocarbon dating programme, in Cleal et al.'. 511—35.
timber monuments are reworked in stone, thereby acknowledging their passing from the realm of the living to the realm of the ancestors. Thus the changing of a monument from wood to stone is a marking of the movement of the living through death to ancestorhood, as the ceremonial places which were once associated with the living became places devoid of living people where the ancestors now reside. Late Neolithic Britain was essentially shared by two communities living side by side, the living and the spirits of the dead. Contrary to recent speculations by archaeologists, New Agers and other groups, the great stone monuments, once built, were largely the domain of the spirit world into which the living rarely entered.25
25 We come full circle in remembering that the earliest surviving written interpretation of Stonehenge, that recorded by Geoffrey of Monmouth around 1136 (Chippindale 1983: 22), is that it was a cenotaph, a monument for the ancestors, commemorating 460 British lords massacred by the Saxon king Hengist at Mount Ambrius (Amesbury).
Acknowledgements. This paper came about as a result of collaboration in association with the making of a BBC documentary on Stonehenge. The working through of this idea and the realization that it is actually applicable to Stonehenge was captured on film on Tuesday 3 February 1998. We are particularly indebted to the programme's director, Jean-Claude Bragard, for arranging for Ramilisonina 's visit to Britain and for helping us towards these conclusions through his acute and perceptive questions. Susan Crighton of the BBC is also to be thanked for her administrative support. We have also benefited from discussions with and advice from Mike Allen, John Barrett, Richard Bradley, Andrew David, Jane Downes, Mark Edmonds, Alex Gibson, Karen Godden, Georges Heurtebize, Dai Morgan-Evans, Colin Renfrew, Retsihisatse, Colin Richards, Niall Sharples, Geoffrey Wainwright and Alasdair Whittle. FIGURES 6 & 7 were drawn by Colin Merrony. The Androy project has been the basis of our own collaboration and resulted in this 'spinoff'. We thank its team members and the people of Androy who have helped us further to understand about living and working with stones. That project has been funded by the British Academy, the National Geographic Society, the Nuffield Foundation and the Society of Antiquaries of London.
ATKINSON, R. J.C. 1979. Stonehenge. Revised edition. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
1987. Stonehenge and neighbouring monuments. London: English Heritage.
BARCLAY, A., M. GRAY & G. LAMBRICK. 1995. Excavations at the Devil's Quoits, Stanton Harcourt, Oxfordshire, 1972—3 and 1988. Oxford: Oxford University Committee for Archaeology. BARRETT, J.C. 1997. Stonehenge, land, sky and the seasons, British Archaeology 29: 8—9.
BENDER, B. 1998. Stonehenge: making space. Oxford: Berg.
BLOCH, M. 1995a. People into places: Zafimaniry concepts of clarity, in E. Hirsch & M, O'Hanlon (ed.), The anthropology of landscape: perspectives on place and space: 63— 77. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
1995b. Questions not to ask of Malagasy carvings, in I. Hodder, M. Shanks, A. Alexandri, V. Buchli, J. Carmen, J. Last & G. Lucas (ed.), Interpreting archaeology: finding meaning in the past: 212—15. London: Routledge.
BRADLEY, R. 1997. Rock art and the prehistory of Atlantic Europe: signing the land. London: Routledge.
BURL, A. 1979. Prehistoric Avebury. New Haven (CT): Yale University Press.
CHAMBERLAIN, A.G. 1996. More dating evidence for human remains in British caves, Antiquity 70: 950—53.
CHIDESTER, D. 1990, Patterns of transcendence: religion, death, and dying. Belmont (CA): Wadsworth,
CHIPPJNDALE, C. 1983. Stonehenge complete. London: Thames & Hudson.
CHIPPINDALE, C. , P. DEVEREUX, P. FOWLER, R. JONES & P. SEBASTIAN. 1990. Who owns Stonehenge? Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
CLEAL, R.MJ. 1995. Pottery fabrics in Wessex in the fourth to second millennia BC, in Kinnes & Varndell (ed.): 1 85—94.
CLEAL, R.M.J., K.E. WALKER & R. MONTAGUE. 1995. Stonehenge in its landscape: twentieth-century excavations. London: English Heritage. Archaeological report 10.
CUNLIFFE, B.W. A.G. RENFREW (ed.). 1997. Science and Stonehenge, Proceedings of the British Academy 92.
CUNNINGTON, M.E. 1929. Woodhenge. Devizes: Simpson.
1931. The 'Sanctuary' on Overton Hill, near Avebury, Wiltshire Archaeological and Natural History Magazine 45: 300-35.
DAMES, M. 1976. The Silbury treasure: the great goddess rediscovered. London: Thames & Hudson.
DARVILI., T. 1997. Ever increasing circles: the sacred geography of Stonehenge and its landscape, Proceedings of the British Acade171Y 92: 167—202.
DAVID, A. & A. PAYNE. 1997. Geophysical surveying within the Stonehenge landscape: a review of past endeavour and future potential, Proceedings of the British Acadelny 92:
73-113.
EARLE, T. (ed.). 1991. Chiefdoms: power, economy, and ideology. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
EDMONDS, M. 1995, Stone tools and society: working stone in Neolithic and Bronze Age Britain. London: Batsford.
EVANS, J,G. 1984. Stonehenge — the environment in the Late Neolithic and Early Bronze Age and a Beaker-age burial, Wiltshire Archaeological and Natural History Society Magazine 78: 7—30.
EVANS-PRITCHARD, E.E. 1956. Nuer religion. Oxford: (.)xlOrd University Press.
GATHERCOLE, & D. LOWENTHAL (ed.). 1989. The poli[ics of the past. London: Unwin Hyman.
GIBSON, A. 1994. Excavations at the Sarn-y-bryn-caled curst'S complex, Welshpool, Powys, and [he timber circles of Great Britain and Ireland, Proceedings of [he Prehistoric Society 60: 143-223.
11995. First impressions: a review of Peterborough Ware in Wales, in Kinncs & Varndell (ed.): 23—39.
HAGGARTY. A. 1991. Machrie Moor, Arran: recent excavations at two stone circles, Proceedings of [he Society of Anliquaries of Scotland 121 : 51—94.
HAWKINS, C.S, 196B. Stonehenge decoded. London: Souvenir Press.
IIODDER, l. 1982. The presenl past: an introduction to anthropology archaeologists. London: Batsiord.
IIOYLE, F. 1966. Speculations on Stonehenge, Antiquity 40: 262— 76.
JOHNSON. I).H. 1994. Nuer prophets: a Ilistory "[prophecy from the Upper Nile in the nineteenth and [wentie[h centuries. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
JOUSSAUME, R. & V. RAHARIJAONA. 1985. Sépultures mégalithiques ä Madagascar, Bulletin de la Société Préhistorique FranGüise 82: 534—51.
KINNES, I. & G. VARNDELL (ed.). 1995. 'Unbaked urns of rudely shape': essays on British and Irish pottery for Ian Long— worth. Oxford: Oxbow.
K US, S. & V. RAHARIJAONA. In press. Between earth and sky there are only a few large boulders: sovereignty and monumentality in central Madagascar, Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 17.
LAYTON, R. (ed.), 1989a. Conflict in the archaeology of living traditions. London: Unwin Hyman.
1989b. Who needs the past? : indigenous values and archaeology. London: Unwin Hyman.
LEBRAS, J.-F. 1971. Les [ransforma[ions de l'architecturefunéraire en Imerina. Antananarivo: Musée d'Art et d' Archéologie.
LEHMANN, A.G. & J.C. MYERS. 1993. Ghosts, souls, and ancestors: power of the dead, in A.G. Lehmann & J.C. Myers (cd.) , Magic, witchcraft, and religion: an cal study of' the supernatural: 283—6. Palo Alto (CA): Mayfield.
MACK, J. 1986. Madagascar: island o/ the ancestors. London: British Museum.
MACKIE, E. 1977. The megalith builders. Oxford: Phaidon.
MAI.ONE, C. 1989. Avebury. London: Batsford & English Heritage.
MERCER, R.J. 1981. The excavation of a Late Neolithic hengetype enclosure at Balfarg, Markinch, Fife, Scotland, 1977— 8, Proceedings of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland
111: 63-171.
MUSSON, C.R. 1971. A study of possible building forms at Durrington Walls, Woodhenge and the Sanctuary, in Wainwright & Longworth: 363—77.
NDEMA, J. 1973. Fomba Antakay (Bezanozano). Fianarantsoa: Ambozontany.
PARKER PEARSON, M. 1992. Tombs and monumentality in southern Madagascar: preliminary results of the central And roy survey, Antiquity 66: 941—8.
1993. Bronze Age Britain. London: Batsford & English Heritage.
PARKER PEARSON, M. , K. GODDEN, G. HEURTEBIZE, RAMILISONINA & RETSIHiSATSE. 1996. The Central Androy Project: fourth report. Unpublished manuscript, Universities of Sheffield and Antananarivo.
PIGGOTT, S. 1947-48. Excavations at Cairnpapple Hill, West Lothian, 1947—8, Proceedings of the Society ofAntiquaries of Scotland 82: 68—123.
PIGGOTT, S, & D.D.A. SIMPSON. 1971. Excavation of a stone circle at Croft Moraig, Perthshire, Scotland, Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society 37: 1—15.
PITTs, M. & A, WHITTLE. 1992. development and date of Avebury, Proceedings of [he Prehistoric Society 58: 203— 12.
POLLARD, J. 1992. The Sanctuary, Overton Hill, Wiltshire: a reexamination, Proceedings of the Prehisloric Society 58: 213-26.
1995, Inscribing space: formal deposition at the later Neolithic monument of Woodhenge, Wiltshire, Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society 61: 1 37—56.
RENFREW, A.G. 1973. Monuments, mobilizalion and social organization in Neoli[hie Wessex, in A.G. Renfrew (ed.). The explanation of cullure change: models in prehistory: 539—58. London: Duckworth.
RICHARDS, C. 1996. lienges and water: towards an elemental understanding of monumentality and landscape in Late Neolithic Britain. Journal of Maleriul Culture Studies 1: 313-30.
RICHARDS, C. & J. THOMAS. 1984. Ritual activily and structured deposition in Later Neolithic Wessex, in R. Bradley & J. (Gardiner (ed.), Neolithic studies: a review of some cur-
rent research: 189—21B, Oxford: British Archaeological Reports. British series 133.
RICHARDS, J.C. 1990. The Stonehenge environs project. London: English Heritage. Archaeological report 16.
1991. Stonehenge. London: Batsford & English Heritage.
RICHARDS, J.C. & M. WHITBY. 1997. The engineering of Stonehenge, Proceedings of the British Academy 92: 231—56.
RUGGLES, C. 1997. Astronomy and Stonehenge, Proceedings of the British Academy 92: 203—29.
SAHLINS, M. & E.R. SERVICE (ed.). 196(). Evolution and culture. Ann Arbor (MI): University of Michigan Press,
SCOTT, J.C. 1988—89. The stone circles at Temple Wood, Kilmartin, Argyll, Glasgow Archaeological Journal 15: 53—124.
SERVICE, E.R. 1962. Primitive social organization: an evolutionary perspective. New York (NY): Random House.
SMITH, I.F. 1965. Windmill Hill and Avebury: excavations by Alexander Keiller 1925—1939. Oxford: Clarendon Press. SMITH, R.j.S., F. HEALY, M. ALLEN, E. MORRIS, I. BARNES & R WOODWARD. 1997. Excavations along the route of the Dorchester by-pass 1986—1988. Salisbury: Wessex Archaeology.
STARTIN, D.W.A. & R. BRADLEY. 1981. Some notes on work organisation and society in prehistoric Wessex, in C. Ruggles & A. Whittle (ed.), Astronomy and society in Britain during the period 4000—1500 BC: 289—96. Oxford: British Archaeological Reports. British series 88.
STEADMAN, L.B., C.T. PALMER & C.F. TILLEY. 1996. The universality of ancestor worship, Ethnology 35: 63—76.
STEWART, M.E.C. 1985. The excavation of a henge, stone circles and metal working area at Moncrieffe, Perthshire, Proceedings of the Society ofAntiquaries of Scotland 115: 125-50.
SWANSON, G.E. 1964. The birth of the gods: the origin ofprimifive beliefs. Ann Arbor (MI): University of Michigan Press.
TILLEY, C. 1996. The power of rocks: topography and monument construction on Bodmin Moor, LVorld Archaeology 28: 161-76.
THOMAS, J. 1991. Rethinking the Neolithic. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
UC'KO, P.J., M. HUNTER, A.J. CLARK A. DAVID. 1991. Avebury reconsidered: from the 1660s to the 1990s. London: Unwin Hyman.
WAINWRIGHT, G.J. 1979. Mount Pleasant, Dorset: excavations 1970—1971. London: Society of Antiquaries.
1989. The henge monuments: ceremony and society in prehistoric Britain. London; Thames Hudson.
WAINWRIGHT, G.J., J.C. EVANS & I.H. LONGWORTH. 1971. The excavation of a Late Neolithic enclosure at Marden, Wiltshire, Antiquaries Journal 51: 177—239.
WAINWRIGHT, G.J. & LH. LONGWORTH. 1971. Durrington Walls: excavations 1966—1968. London: Society of Antiquaries, WATSON, J. & E. RAWSKI (ed.). 1988. Death ritual in late ilnperial and modern China. Berkeley (CA): Cniversity of California Press.
WHITTLE, A. 1997a. Sacred mound, holy rings: Silbury Hill and the West Kem7et palisade enclosures: a Later Neolithic complex in north Wiltshire. Oxford: Oxbow Monograph 74.
1997b, Remembered and imagined belongings: Stonehenge in its traditions and structures of meaning, Proceedings of the British Academy 92: 145—66.
WOODWARD, A.B. & P,j. WOODWARD. 1996. The topography of some barrow cemeteries in Bronze Age iVessex, Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society 62: 275—91.
310	M. PARKER PEARSON RAMILISONINA

	STONEHENGE FOR THE ANCESTORS: THE STONES PASS ON THE MESSAGE	309



316	M. PARKER PEARSON & RAMILISONINA

	STONEHENGE FOR THE ANCESTORS: THE STONES PASS ON THE MESSAGE	309

STONEHENGE FOR THE ANCESTORS: THE STONES PASS ON THE MESSAGE

