	NEWS & NOTES	41
Stonehenge: the stone mason and his craft
TOM ADAMSON*

The words Stone Age create a seemingly unbridgeable gap between fthem and us'. The following study of Stonehenge reveals a human being of ingenuity, resourcefulness and skill decreasing the gap and creating a continuing brotherhood of stone masons.
  Stonehenge was built in several phases. Phase Ill being the structure visible today. R.J.C. Atkinson and others seem to be convinced that the structure required hundreds of men, toiling over several hundred years to completion. Demonstrations by archaeologists and engineers envisage large numbers of men, swinging on levers, resting on precarious fulcrums. This method can confidently be assumed to have resulted in many injuries, fatal and disabling; and begs the question of the willingness of the labourer to be the next victim of a toppled Sarsen upright. There is only room around the end of a lever for a limited number of men, whose weight would have been clumsily inadequate to raise the large Sarsen ring uprights (to say nothing of the Trilithons) with the stones kept continually under control. Studies have been carried out suggesting that the builders understood the intricate movements of solar objects during the earth's rotations and orbits of the sun. It is suggested this understanding would allow for an intelligence capable of seeking a solution to minimize, the loss of life and limb.
It should be remembered that whether today's

large crane, with fulcrum point and counterweight with jib cables, is used, or a timber levor with human counterweights, the same engineering/ mathematical principles apply. FIGURE 1 illustrates the form a Stone Age rig might reasonably assume. The rig shown is of raw timbers, being 8 to 12 inches in diameter and of varying lengths, as required. The main lover is the longest piece, around 40 feet long. Using this rig it would be possible for a handful of men to carry out all the work at Stonehenge, including the fixing of the lintels.
  To replace men swinging on a lever, a counterweight basket has been used, loaded with stones of no more than 50 1b each until the counterweight totals 10 cwt. This lever is then capable of lifting 15 tons at the short end, but the vertical lift of the load is approximately only 3 inches before the counterweight touches the ground. To improve
* Warehills Bridge, Tollorton, York YOGI IRC, England.
ANTIQUITY 76 (2002): 41-2
the height of the lift at each stroke of the short end, the stroke of the counterweight must be increased. This is achieved by excavating a hole directly beneath the counterweight, allowing an improvement of travel of c. 3 feet and leading to a total down-stroke of feet. There is ample proof of these excavations in tho existence of Z and Y holes. Each erect Sarsen stone has a pair of holes situated for this task and that of hoisting the lintels. The outer Y holes need to bo approximately 30 to 35 feet from the stone to be hoisted. If the short end distance of the levers from the fulcrum point was 15 inches with the counterweight distance 35 feet from the fulcrum, this would give a ratio of approximately 28:1. This vantage, with the tons of counterweight plus the weight of the lever, would lift 15 tons vertically by approximately 5-75 inches with each stroke of the lever. The counterweight could be charged and discharged by one man in around 12 minutes: thus, one man is capable of hoisting 15 tons approximately 14 inches in height in one hour. One of the Sarsen uprights could be hoisted into a vertical position in around 12 hours by one man working continuouslv. Allowing a reasonable amount of time for each upright, food and rest, plus a week for excavating the stone hole, moving into position the lifting rig and excavating the counterweight hole, the time taken to erect 30 uprights in the circle would be approximately 30 weeks. With time allowed for moving stones around the site, it
is a reasonable assumption that the first stage of the Sarsen circle (discounting the lintels) could be completed in one year.
  During the whole erection the timber rig is positioned on the inside face of the circle. For hoisting and fixing the lintels on the top bed of the stone uprights, the Tig is moved to the outside of the circle with the timber uprights resting firmly against the outside face of the Sarsen stones. The inclined timbers radiating out from the circle provide one timber upright to each upright stone. A cross timber is fixed at high lovel joining the two vertical timbers together with levers approximately 15 feet long (one to each end of the cross timber), the levers radiating from the centre of the circle. WVith 13 feet of the lever to the outside of the cross timber and 2 feet to the inside, a leverage ratio of about is formed.
NEWS & NOTESAfter lining the lintels with the circumference of the circle, and some 7 feet or so from the stone upright towards the centre of the circle, ropes would be attached to each end of the high levers, and the ropes attached to the inside of the circle (the short end of the levers) would be tied to the ends of the lintels. A timber is then placed on an inclined plane from each end of the lintel, raking up to the top bed of the stone upright_s, forming two inclined ramps, one each end of the lintel. Those raking members allow the lintels to slide whilst they are being hoisted. IVith the lintel tied off to the short end of the high lever, the long end is tied off to the counterweight, and a Z hole excavated beneath the counterweight. The same procedure is followed as with the long lever and the Y holes. Thus, complete control of the stone is preserved all the way to the top of the inclined timber ramps, lifting the stone approximately 9inches on each stroke of the levers with the ratio and a long stroke of about 4-5 feet. The ropes tying off the end of the lintel would be shortened at the end of each stroke, the stone propped or tied at the end of each stroke to allow for the shortening of the ropes.
  Around 25 strokes of the levers would be sufficient to hoist the lintel clear of the protruding
tenon on the top bed of the upright Sarsens, allowing controlled lowering into position by the removal of small stones from the counterweight until equilibrium between the lintel and the counterweight is achieved. With lintels of 7 tons in weight each, the counterweights would need to be 1 ton with a to 1 ratio leverage. This would requiro 0-5 ton for each lever, approximately the same as the counterweight used for the erection of the uprights. This allows the weight of the lintel to be controlled at all times of the lift, and capable of lifting the stone higher than the top of the tenons: thus the tenons register with the cut mortices under the lintels.
  The complexity of Stonehenge has elicited strange conclusions, one being to look in tho direction of extra-terrestrial beings. The words of Bernard of Chartres, c. 1130, applied to the stonemasons of Stonehenge øive a more realistic explanation of this awesome building:
'We are like dwarfs on the shoulders of giants so that we can see Inore than they and things at a great distance, not by virtue of any sharpness of sight on our part, or any physical distinction, but because we are carried on high and raised up by their great size.'


FIGURE 1. This illustration shovvs the rig in its lintel fixing mode. It is probable that the counterweights were salvaged from rejected Phase Il bluestones; the constant loading and unloading would have left stone chips at the base of the holes; the sides of the holes would have had occasional scrapes causing chalk falls. Both of t.hese vvere observed by the 20th-centzny excavators.
