Stonehenge : a review'
by R. S. NEWALL
N up-to-date book on Stonehenge by Mr Atkinson is indeed a great acquisition ; it is a book for the intelligent reader as well as for the archaeologist, and is by far the best book on the subject that has so far been written.
    The author explains how a potsherd or stone, when carelessly thrown away, will gradually sink owing to the action of earth worms, through the earthy top-soil till it reaches an impermeable layer, so that where, as here, the soil is shallow a layer is formed containing objects of all periods. Such a statement made in the 1920's was laughed at. Further, he goes on to say (p. 168) : ' The one thing about Stonehenge upon which everyone is agreed is that it is primarily a " temple," a structure in which it was possible for man to establish contact and communication with extra-mundane forces or beings No one in the nineteen-twenties could have made such a statement and survived. Abercromby said it in his book (Bronze Age Pottery, 1912), and his chapter on Stonehenge is still well worth reading, but it is never quoted or referred to. It was Abercromby, not the present reviewer, who first pointed out the importance of the south-western end of the axis. The only obvious error noticed (p. 195) is the statement that Colonel Hawley was Director of the Society of Antiquaries. However, this slight error is amply made up for by the forty photographs, all but six of which reveal some feature never before published and probably not even photographed ; one of them (plate 11 : Stonehenge from the northi) has an artistic quality that no other photograph I can recall has ever had. The effect of light and shade is most beautiful.
    Mr Atkinson describes the excavations of the last few years, carried out in cooperation with Professor Piggott and Dr J. F. S. Stone with great care. No one of course will question statements of facts about the excavations ; but some of the inferences drawn from them are open to discussion, and no one will welcome such discussion more than the author of the book, for it is through that that the story of Stonehenge unfolds. This remark applies particularly to Chapter 3 (' The Sequence of Construction '), a very diffcult chapter to write and well done. Early in the book the author says that an archaeologist's eyes are too often buried ostrich-like in the ground ; I feel that in order to understand Stonehenge one's eyes must be not only below ground but also above it and directed to the heavens ; of this more anon.
    Bearing this in mind, let us consider the first period of construction to which he assigns the Heel Stone, the bank and ditch and the post-holes on the original narrow causeway. But he does not mention the fact that these post-holes are radially arranged with six or more holes in line, and that they are also placed in arcs which are concentric with the centre, stone-holes D and E, the timber structure at A and the Aubrey-hole cremations. To his second period he assigns the double circle of blue stones, the widened causeway, the Heel Stone ditch, the Avenue, the dismantling of stones D and E

    * Stonehenge, by R. J. C. Atkinson, Hamish Hamilton, London, 16s. The Editor wishes to thank the publishers for the loan of the block from which the plan facing p. 140 has been printed. 1 Nearly north-east would have been more correct.
ANTIQUITY
and the erection of stones B and C. He says (p. 15) that the Heel Stone ditch must be more or less contemporary with the erection of the Heel Stone, or later (p. 60). This ditch belongs to Period Il, therefore the Heel Stone belongs to Period Il or I. If it belongs to Period Il it would be contemporary with the Avenue and would then have been placed centrally on it, which it was not ; therefore it is earlier than the Avenue and belongs to Period I ; and this, he says, is confirmed by the Beaker sherds found in the earth filling between the outer face of the Heel Stone and the edge of the stone-hole. The outer face of this stone is now about 200 out from the perpendicular ; it is not known when it began to lean. A Beaker burial could perhaps have been placed against the stone at any time in that period, but the accidental fall of some of its pieces down to a deeper level in slipping soil cannot be used as evidence of a period of construction. The reason given on p. 66 for putting the Heel Stone ditch in Period Il is that a flake of rhyolite was found on the bottom of the ditch, which evidently means that the ditch is contemporary with the introduction of rhyolite into the monument, or very little later than that. No known rhyolites were present in Period I. One feels that the ditch must belong to the same period as the stone. Beaker sherds or rhyolite chips were in the refilled stone-holes of the double circle. Further, the asymmetrical position of the Heel Stone in relation to the axis of Period I is against it being of that period.
    None of the finds, and none of the inferences drawn from them would be against the theory that in Period I Stonehenge was a wooden henge with some central wooden structure whose post-holes might be discoverable. The post-holes on the narrow causeway, the four A holes and the D and E holes all on one alignment (though these are more doubtful), are most suggestive, whereas the Heel Stone is some 5 0 to the east of this line. If, on the other hand, any part of the central area could be found still intact and unviolated by treasure hunters, there is just a possibility that excavation might reveal stone-holes which were the original holes of the dressed and spotted dolerites of the Horseshoe and the two lintels of the Blue Stone circle. This would belong to Period I and would be a very suitable setting indeed for these stones. The author says (p. 73) it is possible that stone-holes J and L may even be two of the holes for these stones, but that the holes belong to Period Ill b; why Ill ? (The eight photographs showing details of these stones are most excellent). Their present position can now be explained only by recourse to that very unsatisfactory phrase, ' change of plan One wonders whether all the blue stones were imported at one period. In the 19th century there was a theory that a blue stone monument, not just rough boulders, had been brought from somewhere. We do not know whether there was one importation or several. If it was a monument of dressed stones that was imported, that might mean that the Stonehenge layer of blue stones is composed rather of destruction fragments than of dressing chips. The discovery of blue stones in Boles Barrow (a long barrow) suggests that there was more than one importation. On p. 104 only one such stone is mentioned, but Cunnington says in a letter that he found more than one. It is possible that the Blue Stone circle is due to a second importation in Period Il.
    It was during Period Ill a, that all the sarsens (except the Heel Stone) were transported and erected, and the carvings made. In order that this might be done the double circle was removed and the stone holes were rammed tight ; in these holes were found a few Beaker sherds. Next came the erection of the five trilithons (p, 68). ' The building of the outer circle came next, followed by the erection of the four station stones and the Slaughter Stone and its companion '. Here, as I said before, the archaeologist must raise his eye—or at any rate his mind—to the sky. As stated in the guide-book, stones 91 and 93 of the four stations are very carefully placed with relation to the sunrise and
STONEHENGE : A REVIEW
the sunset at four dates in the year, namely, 45 days between the Solstices and the Equinoxes. But as there seems nothing to indicate the Equinoxes, these two stones may be regarded as dividing the year into four equal periods ; with the two missing stones 92 and 94 they again duplicate the Solstitial alignment of the later sarsen monument and that of the earlier double Blue Stone circle. If these stones were intended for this use they must be earlier than the sarsen monument, because they cannot be seen either from its centre or from each other ; therefore they must be either the earliest feature in Period Ill a or earlier than it. The author admits (p. 69) that they may belong to Period Il, and that the ditches round the two barrows closely resemble the ditch round the Heel Stone, though not so deep. One cannot help feeling that these stones and their ditches, together with the Heel Stone and its ditch, all belong to Period Il or the very beginning of Period Ill a ; but since their dressing is either slight or absent one favours Period Il. The author suggests (p. 18) that ' they formed symbolic memorials of an operation of field geometry ' to find the centre of the circle. That their diagonals cross at the centre tells in favour of both this and the other theory, and a combination of the two is probably the correct solution. Nor does the author disregard the solar aspect of Stonehenge (p. 172). ' In Stonehenge Il there is indeed specific evidence that the sun played some part, and perhaps the central one, in the beliefs of the builders '. 
curious to think that thirty years ago most members of the general public would have believed this and said so, though few archaeologists would have dared to.
    Let us now go back to the Heel Stone and its ditch, remembering that the author says that the Heel Stone belongs to Period I and its ditch to Period Il, and look at the Avenue. The plan shows that the distance between this stone and the Avenue bank is about 25 feet. Is it possible that just over 80 huge sarsens could be brought in Period Ill a through this gap without damaging either the stone or the bank? Stones B and C must necessarily belong to the end of Period Il or be even later ; but since they are centrally placed on the Avenue and on the axial line of the sarsen monument, they must belong to Ill a or be later, and it is reasonable to place the Avenue late in Ill a, for it is governed by the width of the wider causeway of Period Il, with its bank overlying the Heel Stone ditch (assigned to the end of Il or early in Ill a). Against this reconstruction is the absence of blue stone dressing chips in the silt and the presence of destruction fragments above the silt in the Avenue ditches. Apart from this it would be more reasonable to assign the Avenue and stones B and C to Period Ill than to Il.
    The holes D and E are said to have held stones in Period I. Their position suggests that they belong to this period. Hole D did not look like a post-hole, but from the plan only one might favour posts here. Was it a stone-hole ? One cannot rely upon one's memory to decide that. E is stated to have been re-used in Ill a, ' but of this stone nothing remains '. It is true that nothing remains above ground, but there is still a large sarsen flake standing upright on the bottom of the hole, and above it on the side of the hole is the impression of the stone ; obviously two Slaughter Stones once stood here, probably not later than the end of Period Il, contemporary with the four stations and the Heel Stone. They must have been removed before Ill a, to allow for the bringing in of the sarsens. If they were erected after the sarsen monument, then they must have been removed soon after, because the Slaughter Stone, if standing, would have hidden the Heel Stone from the centre. The author also thinks that the Y and Z holes belong to this Period Ill b. It is entirely due to his careful excavations that these holes are now better understood ; but it is doubtful whether these 59 (doubtless originally 60) holes were ever intended to hold blue stones, as the author suggests, pointing to the correspondence in numbers—82 in the double blue stone circle corresponding to 60 in
ANTIQUITY
the Y and Z holes plus 19 in the Horseshoe plus 2 blue stone lintels and the Altar Stone. ' This correspondence cannot be dismissed as a chance coincidence ; and it may accordingly be accepted (as a working hypothesis which covers the observed facts in the simplest way) that the dressed blue stones and the Y and Z holes are associated with each other and form part of the same phase of construction ' (p. 72). This reminds one of Sir Flinders Petrie's theory of the Blue Stone Circle : he wrote that its stones are arranged in pairs, in which one stone is diametrically opposite the other. ' The probability of 11 out of 18 stones being by chance opposite to each other in a set of 44 places is about 5000 to 1 . If 44 paired with 34 it would increase the improbability of chance to 30,000 to 1. Thus it appears that the betting against there having ever been any more than there are now is very strong, because it is most unlikely that only stones opposite each other would have been removed. The excavations of 1954 show that many stones were removed or broken off above ground level.
  Mr Atkinson is probably more pleased at finding the incised dagger and axes than at anything else. The axes can definitely be identified as belonging to the Middle Bronze Age, and the largest is nearly the same size as the largest known Irish bronze axe. The tapering butt of the two axes on Stone 4 may represent an unrecognized type or more probably be an error in marking out ; compare the axes on plate Xll a, with those on plate Xll b. As for the dagger, it is doubtful, owing to the weathering of the surface, whether it can really be regarded as a Mycenaean dagger. The same may be said of the symbol on Stone 57 ; it cannot be regarded as certain that it represents the Mother Goddess. But to return to the dagger ; seen in a certain light it gives one the impression that it began as an axe, and that the handle and about one third of the blade—the pointed end—were added later. There seems as yet to be no proof that these symbols are contemporary with the erection of the stones. Nor does there seem to be any significance in the stones selected for the symbols, except perhaps that all are made on the softer sarsens. The author says (p. 136) that it is impossible to use flint chisels on sarsen. Very many flint mauls were found during the earlier excavations, used no doubt on the softer sarsens. The general reader will be most interested in Chapter 4 (' The Technique of Construction ') which gives the man-power required for transport and erection ; but only an engineer could discuss this chapter. When one remembers that far larger stones have been moved by man-power alone, it is rather the skill shown in the placing of the stones in their exact positions than the transport of them that amazes one.
    Mr Atkinson says that the earlier excavations of 1920—26 were not carried out as they should have been. As one who took a large part in them I freely admit this1 ; but Colonel Hawley very often complained of the lack of interest shown. No advice was ever offered, and when he read his annual report his careful work was praised. One can never imagine that thirty years hence Mr Atkinson's work will be so criticized. It is a pity that more archaeologists were not able to see it. Let me conclude by again recommending very strongly this most enlightening book.
    

p. 40
    
STONEHENGE : A REVIEW
After reading the above review, Mr Atkinson sends us the following comments :
    Since Mr Newall's review was written before the Stonehenge excavations of 1956, he has most generously suggested that I should comment upon it in the light of the latest work. In doing so I am delighted to have a further opportunity of acknowledging the debt which I and my colleagues owe him as the recorder and interpreter of the earlier excavations.
    In criticizing my suggested sequence of construction Mr Newell has dwelt particularly on the features for which the evidence of relative date is least satisfactory, namely the Heel Stone and its ditch (assigned by me to Periods I and Il respectively) and the dressed bluestones and Y and Z holes (constituting my Period Ill b).
    The recent excavations have shown that the Heel Stone's ditch is later than an ancient disturbance extending to the w. of the stone, which according to Col. Hawley was later than the innermost post-hole of the wooden structure at A, itself apparently of Period I and certainly earlier than the bank of the Avenue of Period Il. The Beaker sherds (not part of a burial) found against the S.E. side of the stone in 1953 are admittedly not mandatory evidence for an earlier date for the Stone, though they were not in the area disturbed by its subsequent movement. But in any case the Heel Stone and its ditch must be earlier than the Avenue ; and the latter, from the evidence of the widening of the entrance which it matches (pp. 63—5) must be earlier than the period of the sarsen mauls (Ill a). Mr Newall's argument that the Heel Stone, not being on the axis of Period I, must be later than that period, applies with the same force to all the subsequent periods. Nor is it necessary to assign stone-holes B and C to Period Ill a, or later, on the ground that they lie on the sarsen axis ; for this is the same as the axis of Period Il.
    The objection that these stones, or the Heel Stone, would obstruct the passage of the sarsens up the Avenue is one which I have anticipated (pp. 116—17). The recent work suggests that the gap in the earthwork close to stone 93 was made deliberately in ancient times and may well provide the answer to this problem.
    Of the existence at Stonehenge of the dressed bluestone structure (Ill b) we now have evidence in the form of five stone-holes not otherwise accounted for. Of these, two are the holes J and L and two others lie between them, athwart the inner ends of the extended entrance stone-holes of Period Il. They were excavated, but not recognized, by Col. Hawley and the evidence of their relationship was unfortunately destroyed beyond recovery. The fifth hole lies between stones 59 a and 70, and had been dug into the filling of a still earlier hole (apparently of Period Il) sealed by filling characteristic of Period Ill a, and had itself been re-used in Period Ill c for a stone of the present horseshoe (70 a) whose stump was found in situ.
    We now know also that the double bluestone circle of Period Il was never finished, since we have found a gap of unknown extent on its w. side ; and this raises the possibility mentioned by Mr Newall, of two separate importations of these stones. (Incidentally, it should be made clear that the important letter from Cunnington, to which Mr Newall refers, is an unpublished one of which I was previously unaware. It happily clears up the ambiguity of the published letter (W.A.M., XLII (1924), 432) about the number of bluestones found in Boles Barrow). None the less, it is clear that as planned Stonehenge Il consisted of upwards of 80 stones ; and the known plan of the present bluestone setting (Ill c) shows that little short of 80 stones were still present in the last phase. Since the dressed bluestones must have numbered at least 22, there remains a residue of about 60 to be accounted for in Period Ill b. If the Y and Z holes were not intended for them, what were they for ? Structural phases, like other entities, must not be multiplied praeter necessitatem. R. J. C. ATKINSON.
141
          1 As one who remembers those excavations and visited them I must agree ; but I would point out (what many of us knew at the time) that it was entirely due to Mr Newall's share in them that they were not worse. His observations and sectional drawings recorded much that would otherwise have been lost ; and his timely removal of the objects found from the wooden hut, where— incredible as it may seem—they were just left to look after themselves, to a place of temporary safety should now be put on record. For further details and confirmation of these remarks see A Histopy of the Society of Antiquaries, by Joan Evans, p. 398. O.G.S.C.
    ---------------
    
    ------------------------------------------------------------
    
    ---------------
    
    ------------------------------------------------------------
    
137
    
137
    
137
    

    

    

    

    

    

    
