                      NOTES AND NEWS
    Each quadrant and the outer surface of the sides of the dish are
decorated with neatly drawn lines meeting mostly at a point, like a
curved V. The lines appear to be filled with a white substance which
renders the pattern very distinct on the dark background.
    We have here a pre-Phoenician burial with tomb furniture of the
Maltese Stone Age type, similar to that which I have described in The
Antiquaries Journal (October 1928), VIII, p. 479.




     The field in which the rock-tomb was found has other interesting
features, which will be investigated. Along one of the walls fourteen
megalithic blocks stand in a line for about 60 ft. They are evidently
the remains of an old building the nature of which can be judged only
by a careful excavation.
STONEHENGE
     Mrs M. E. CUNNINGTON    sends us the following note, which usefully
summarizes one aspect of a perennial problem, and suggests that a
re-excavation of some of the barrows referred to is called for :-
     The occurrence of chippings of the stones of Stonehenge in barrows
                                  223
                                 ANTIQUITY

is often referred to as throwing light on the date of the monument, but
the evidence never seems to have been stated in full.
     Chippings of the ‘ foreign ’ stones are reported to have been found
in three round barrows in the neighbourhood. If it were certain that
these barrows had never been disturbed, the finding in them of chips of
the stones would be almost conclusive evidence that Stonehenge was
at least as old as the barrows. This, however, would only necessitate
a date in the full Bronze Age, as in each case the primary burial was
after cremation. Although in one or two cases evidence of burning
has been noticed in long barrows1 in the south of England, actual
cremation does not seem to have been practised until the close of the
beaker period. Incidentally it may be said that the discovery of
cremation burials in the Aubrey holes and on the floor of the ditch at
Stonehenge suggests no greater antiquity.
     It is necessary therefore to examine the evidence from the three
barrows in some detail. They are Hoare’s numbers 16, 30, and 4z8
     I n the paper on Stonehenge in ANTIQUITY        for March 1929, Mr
Newall quotes Hoare’s account of the discovery in barrow 16. Hoare,
who was not present at the opening, transcribed his account, with one
or two slight verbal alterations, from a letter written to him by William
Cunnington, who carried out the excavation? He kept a copy of his
letter to Hoare and it is now in our possession ; it has never been
published before and is given here in full, and may be compared with
Hoare’s published account.
      ‘ West of Stonehenge is a mutilated flat barrow 76 feet in diameter
but only 3 feet high. I n page 46 of Stukeley’s Stonehenge, he says
“ And in a great and very flat old fashioned Barrow, west from Stone-
henge, among such matters (i.e. human and animal bones) I found
bits of red and blue Marble, Chippings of the stones of the Temple
so that probably the interred was one of the builders ”. I conceive this
was the Barrow Stukeley opened, as we discovered a very long section
which had been made by the Doctor, and bones of two skeletons which
had been interred on the floor, also several pieces of Stag’s horns and
Animal bones, and what is strange some pieces of Sarsen Stones similar
to those at Stonehenge ’.
                                                                                      -
        In five long barrows in Wilts, see Wilts Arch. Mag. XXXVIII, 380.
        The barrows are nos 4 and 45, Amesbury, and 28 Winterbourne Stoke, in Goddard’s
list, Wilts Arch. Mag. xxxv111.
        An. Wilts, I, 127.

                                         224
                        NOTES AND NEWS
     ‘ On clearing out the earth from the Doctor’s section, I perceived
a small heap of whiter earth which on removing we came to the primary
interment, a deposit of burnt bones in a fine Circular Cist, with which
were found a Brass Spearhead, and brass pin, the former in high
preservation. It is rather singular that these burnt bones (a more
than usual quantity) should have been undisturbed in a barrow in which
were a hundred Rabbit burrows’.
      ‘ On removing the earth from over [t?ulics mine, M.E.C.] the Cist we
found a large piece of one of the blue Stones at Stonehenge, same as
no. 2,17,and 19,which Sowerby calls a Hornstone, the finding this as
also the Sarsen stones is very singular. Some persons who are acquainted
with the soil in these South parts of Wiltshire, might think the finding
of pieces of Sarsen stones no uncommon thing. I should have thought
the same of this had they been rounded by attrition like all Stones of
this species ; but the stones found in this Barrow are pieces chipped off
similarly (I am sorry to say) to those that are now daily chipped off from
the fallen Trilithon’.
      ‘ In regard to the blue Stone we are certain this species is not to
be found in the South of Wiltshire’.
      ‘ I remember well that on first opening the fine Bell shaped Barrow
North East of Stonehenge we also found one or two pieces of the chippings
of the Stones. In the Waggon tracks within the area of Stonehenge I
have frequently found chippings of several of the Stones both Sarsen
and others, and in digging within the area of the work I have frequently
found them. In regard to finding pieces of Stonehenge Stone within
the Tumuli, the most natural conclusion will be that these pieces
were scattered about on the plain, before the erection of the Tumuli
under which they have been found. If this conclusion is just, it gives
higher antiquity to our British Temple than many Antiquaries are
disposed to allow. I confess it has often struck me when opening
the Tumuli in the vicinity of Stonehenge, how it was possible that
Barbarians (for such one must rank the Britons deposited in these
Sepulchres) could raise such a work as Stonehenge’.
      The statement that a piece of blue stone was found over the cist
(i.e. grave) leaves it quite uncertain as to whether it was in the soil
disturbed by the previous investigators or not, therefore this cannot be
considered as conclusive evidence that it was associated with the primary
burial in the cist, as is sometimes too optimistically stated.
      In Mr Newall’s quotation from Hoare the word ‘ over ’ has been
                                  225
                                  ANTIQUITY

inadvertently omitted, and so rather alters the emphasis. The disturbed
skeletons were evidently secondary interments, and were quite possibly
responsible for the introduction of the stones into the mound at any time
subsequent to the primary burial, even as late perhaps as the Saxons.
      The bell-barrow north-east of Stonehenge referred to in the letter,
in which chippings of the stones were also found, has been thought
to be barrow 30, but even this is uncertain, and nothing more is known
of the discovery.*
      In the third instance, that of barrow 42, a piece of diabase that had
been scratched out of the mound by rabbits was picked up in 1887.6
      It thus appears that there is no reliable evidence connecting
chippings from the stones of Stonehenge with the primary burial
or the original construction of a round barrow.
      It may be said that in view of the fact that blue stones were found
in the long barrow known as Bowl’s Barrow, that this is no longer of
importance. But in that case they were in the form of boulders, and
as Mr Newall rightly says proves the presence of blue stones in Wiltshire
in the long barrow period, but not necessarily their erection at
Stonehenge.
      All that is known of the discovery of blue stones in Bowl’s Barrow
has been published comparatively recently and need not be repeated
here.
      Thurnam records finding a piece of stone precisely agreeing with
the altar stone in the long barrow no. 170.7
      Subsequently, however, William Cunningtons writes :-‘ It is
of fine micaceous sandstone, it is true, and so far resembles the “ altar ”,
stone at Stonehenge, but it is of a lighter colour, and so does not
‘6
   precisely agree ” with the altar stone. I t is an implement, probably
a whetstone, and moreover is entered by Dr Thurnam as having been
found in a secondary interment in the barrow. No date, even com-
parative, can be given to it, and for the purpose of our Stonehenge
argument it is useless ’ . 9 The stone is said to be in the British Museum.

      Wilts Arch. Mag. XVI,66, note I.
      ibid. Note 2 and Devizes Museum Cat. pt. I, 264h,note.
      ibid. X L I I ,431.
      Archaeologia, X L I I I , 425-6,note. Barrow 170 is Wilsford 34 in Goddard’s list.
For further details of this find see Wilts Arch. Mag. X X X V I I I ,405-6.
      Grandson of the William Cunnington who died in 1810and was a contemporary
of Hoare.
    @  Wilts Arch. Mag. X V I , 93.
                                         226
