	NOTES	855
Stonehenge for the ancestors: part two
M. PARKER PEARSON & RAMILISONINA *

We have identified a structuring principle of hardening in the passage from life to ancestorhood which can be found in contemporary Madagascar, Neolithic and Bronze Age Britain and, for that matter, contemporary Britain. I The use of analogy that we have preferred is not the formal ethnographic parallel, nor is it crosscultural generalization, but a relational analogy; we did not intend to apply it as a 'universal' but as a 'What if . ? ' scenario unfortunately we inadvertently gave Barrett & Fewster, and perhaps other readers, the wrong end of the stick. 2 What is important is not the analogy per se — it ultimately tells us only that such things are possible rather than universal — but whether the archaeological evidence in question can be adequately explained in this way through detailed contextual study. The analogy merely provides the comparison; its suitability is decided by the degree of corroboration and goodness of fit with the evidence of the archaeological case-study.
  What makes a good analogy, then, is that not only does the basic premise hold but it opens previously unforeseen avenues of study and reveals potential corroborations which had not previously been understood. We can only summarize these new directions that have surfaced after our preliminary study. 3 For example, we think that the use of stone as temper in pottery, mundane as it might seem, had ancestral meanings and metaphors in certain regions of Britain. Middle Neolithic Peterborough Ware (a type of Neolithic Irnpressed Ware) in Wcssex
I After death, flowers are often placed at the graveside, some[imcs with a wooden cross. Later [hey are replaced by a gravestone.
Z The use of 'we' on p. 309 (PP&R 1998) was [or archaeologists in general rather than PP&R; it was a way of showing [he different approaches [o analogy used by archaeologists. We should have been jl_ldgemental as well as descriptive. 3 Hopefully a paper by MVP in the proceedings of the September 1998 conference on 'Neolithic (Orkney in its European context' will provide a fuller exposition.
(c. 3400—2500 BC; Gibson & Kinnes 1997) is mostly stone gritted (Cleal 1995). It occurs in ancestral contexts — chambered tombs, stone circles, cursuses — and in burials, caves and watery/waterside contexts. The decorative practice of impressing pottery with organic materials to create 'ghosts' of form without substance in the clay is now comprehensible. Overlapping for 300 years with Peterborough Ware, Grooved Ware (c. 2800—2200 BC), mimicking basketry, is never stone gritted in Wessex (Cleal 1995: figure 16.2, table 16.1). 4 It is associated with wooden structures rather than stone and rarely occurs either with Peterborough Ware or in funerary contexts. This distinction between 'ancestor' wares and 'living' wares is visible in the Stonehenge landscape: the pottery is found in two distinct areas, one to the west and the other to the east of Stonehenge. This distinction survives briefly into the Early Bronze Age, manifested in the differing fabrics of Beakers in burials and Beakers in other contexts (Boast 1995: 71—2, figure 7.1). There are other avenues to explore: the possibilities of stone quarries as having ancestral associations (Cooney 1998: 110); rock-art as representing tattooing or scarification of ancestral bodies; the use of earth and chalk as having a mediatory status between living and ancestors; the significance of pits for ritual mediation rather than mundane waste or storage use; and the use of cursuses, hitherto completely mysterious, as pathways for the newly dead being initiated into ancestorhood. We also think that the juxtaposition of limber to stone monuments (somelirnes as chronological replacement) also occurred outside Wessex in the late 4tlm to 3rd millennia BC at complexes
4 Prior to, and contemporary vvit,h, early Peterborough Wares, Neolithic Plain Wares may be stone gritted or sand grilled. From the very lew contex[s in southern Britain that we can be certain are settlements, initial study suggests that assemblages are dominated by sand or organic tempored pots.

* Parker Pearson, l)epartment or A_rchaeology & Prehistory, University of Sheffield, Sheffield SIC) '2TN, England. Ramili.sonina, Musée d' Art el d'Archéologie, Universil(i de Antananarivo. BP 564, Madagascar.
Received 6 October 1 998, accepted (i ()ctober 1998.
ANTIQUITY 72 (1998): 855Aj
856	NOTES

such as Penrith, Rudston, Oakham, Knowth, Newgrange, Ballynahatty and Hindwell. By the Collared Urn phase of the Early Bronze Age the principle was largely gone — with Stonehenge's 'visibility envelope' encroached upon by barrows, and ceramic tempers no longer limited according to context. Yet it may be detectable in: EBA round barrow constructions in which timber is replaced by earth and stone; in the building of earth-dug or stone-built MBA houses; and in the digging of the first field ditches on Salisbury Plain, around this time, with field boundaries laid out on the same solstice axis as Stonehenge (D. Field pers. comm.). Stone and timber were thus understood differently, but aspects of the tradition were reworked within new contexts.
  Whittle and Barrett & Fewster seem to agree with the relevance of stone as ancestral metaphor at Stonehenge; the disagreements are over the use of analogy. Barrett & Fewster correctly point out the limitations of cross-cultural probability analogy; there are many societies without ancestor beliefs such as the Achuar (Descola 1996: 363—83). Their criticisms are best directed at Steadman et al. (1996) whose results we used uncritically. However, Barrett & Fewster are wrong to reject the significance of structuring principles. Unlike other social scientists, archaeologists are often not even able to identify
References
BARRETT, J.C. 1994. Fragments from antiquity: an archaeology of social life in Britain, 2900—1200 BC. Oxford: Blackwell.
BOAST, R. 1995. Fine pots, pure pots, Beaker pots, in Kinnes & Varndell (ed.): 69—80.
CLEAL, R.M.J. 1995. Pottery fabrics in Wessex in the fourth to second millennia BC, in Kinnes & Varndell (ed.): 185—94.
COONEY, G. 1998. Breaking stones, making places: the social landscape of axe production sites, in A. Gibson & D.D.A. Simpson (ed.), Prehistoric ritual and religion: essays in honour of Aubrey Burl: 108—18. Stroud: Sutton.
DESCOLA, P. 1996. The spears of twilight: life and death in the Amazon jungle. London: HarperCollins.
the things that we study. Structuring principles have to be identified before we can talk about agency and how they were acted upon. If you don't know the aim of the game, you won't understand what the players are doing or how well they are doing it. We cannot talk of an archaeology of inhabitation and practice if we do not know what was inhabited and what was practised. Like the children of prehistoric societies, we must first understand the structuring principles, taken on by them as common understandings shared and passed down, as an initial 'way in' before our understanding develops to grasp the subtleties and contingencies of life.
  Whittle is unhappy that stone monuments might have been exclusive spaces for the ancestors. Yet archaeologists have hitherto taken for granted their 'inhabitation' by the living (for example, Barrett 1994: 13—20, 43—7); we suggest that incorporeal ancestral inhabitation better explains the evidence. 5
5 Because of lack of space, Silbury Hill must remain in the footnotes. It stands between the living and the ancestors in the same way as Stonehenge 1 & 2, relating to the West Kennet Avenue as Stonehenge 1 & 2 relates to the cursus, a pattern found in other cursus arrangements where a large mound/henge/ring ditch lies midway along one side of the cursus. Silbury's particular form is unique but its placing is not. The piece of bluestone from its summit (Whittle 1997: 21) hints at the intriguing possibility of bluestones having been set up here (F. Kaul pers. comm.).
GIBSON, A. & I, KIINNES, 1997. On the urns of a dilemma: radiocarbon and the Peterborough problem, Oxford Journal of Archaeology 16: 65—72.
KINNES, I. & G. VARNDELL (ed.). 1995. •Unbaked urns of rudely shape': essays on British and Irish pottery for Ian Longworth. Oxford: Oxbow,
STEADMAN, LB., c.T. PALMER & C.F. TILLEY, 1996. The universality of anc.estor worship, Ethnology 35: 63—76.
WHITTLE, A. 1997. Sacred Mound Holy Rings: Silbury Hill and the West Kennet Palisade Enclosures: a Later Neolithic Ccnnplex in North VViltshire. Oxford: Oxbow. Monograph
74.
