ANTIQUITY
    A large plan of Ur, showing the buildings which have been uncovered, is shown ; and there is a mosaic of air-photographs of Ur and its surroundings. One of the most pleasing features is a series of water-colour drawings by Mr A. S. Whitburn. There is a charming distant view of the great Ziggurat, reflected in mirage, and standing out boldly against the hazy blue ; the desert atmosphere is there. A reconstruction of a typical house of Abraham's time—about 2000 B.C.— is also reproduced as the frontispiece of this number, by permission of the Trustees of the two Museums. There are also coloured reconstructions of the courtyard and sanctuary of E-Dub-La1 about 1400 B.C.), and of the courtyard of the Gig-Par-Ku of Nin-Gal about 2000 B.C.)
    In our editorial notes we have referred to the future plans of campaign, and we would again urge our readers to support this epoch-making work in the most practical way possible.
STONEHENGE AVENUE
    In order to ascertain whether the Avenue crossed the modern Stonehenge-Amesbury road, trenches were dug on 28 June 1927 at the southern edge of the field which lies between that road and the farm buildings of West Farm, Amesbury.
    Air-photographs show the lines of the Avenue ditches running down to the Stonehenge-Amesbury road, but owing to the fact that the field on the south side is down to pasture no traces of the ditches can be seen there. Mr Crawford had marked down the probable line of the continuation of the Avenue, and trenches were cut at right angles to this line. There were no surface indications of the ditches.
    The left hand or eastern edge of the Avenue was revealed as a flat-bottomed ditch 1 foot 10 inches below the surface and 10 inches below the level of the undisturbed chalk. The width of the flat bottom of the ditch was 1 foot, and at the level of the undisturbed chalk the ditch was 2 feet wide. There was no increased depth of humus over the ditch. Beneath the humus over the ditch the soil consisted of earthy flint rubble, but in the filling of the ditch proper there was a sloping silt of earthy flint rubble with a considerable admixture of chalk. This silt sloped from the eastern or outer side down to the western or inner side of the ditch, and suggests that it must have come in from the former edge. There were no indications of a bank but the direction of the silting implies that there was one outside the ditch on the far side of the Avenue. Near its Stonehenge
342



	SEAL IMPRESSIONS 	UR
facing p. 342

NOTES AND NEWS
termination however the bank is inside the ditch. A few scraps of pottery, mostly medieval, and some fragments of bone and two or three flakes were found in the top soil near the ditch. No pieces of sarsen or blue-stones were discovered.


SECTION OF DITCHES OF STONEHENGE AVENUE
    The western or right hand ditch of the Avenue was found in that portion of the field which had been cultivated up to recent times. Consequently the humus and top soil was deeper over that area. The ditch was flat-bottomed with a steep side to the west and a more sloping
343
ANTIQUITY
side to the east. The bottom of the ditch was 8 inches in width. Below the level of the undisturbed chalk the filling of the ditch had a quantity of chalk in its composition, but this layer did not slope, as in the eastern ditch, but lay horizontally. There was no indication of a bank.
    The distance between the ditches, measured from centre to centre, was 110} feet. The variation in the width of the Avenue is a remarkable feature. At the Stonehenge end it is 70 feet, between the Old and New King barrows 68 feet, halfway between the King barrows and its crossing of the Stonehenge-Amesbury road 84 feet, and immediately to the north of the road 113 feet.
    Some search was made along the outer edge of the Avenue but no stone or post holes were found. There were however indications that trees had formerly grown in the vicinity of the left hand ditch.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
STÜKELEY.—Stonehenge, 35 •
H0ARE.—Ancient Wilts, i, 158.
HAWLEY AND NEwALL.—Antiquaries Journal, v, 23.
STONE.—Stones of Stonehenge, 125.
CRAWFORD.—Observer, 22 July and 23 Sept. 1923.
Antiquaries Journal, iv, 57—59'
Illustrated London News, 18 Aug. 1923.
Ord. Survey Prof. Papers. New series, v, 23. Wilts. Arch. Mag., xlii, 405—6.
R. C, C. CLAY.
CAERLEON
    We quote the following, from a leaflet which has recently been circulated, because it contains the latest and most authoritative account of the Roman legionary-fortress.
    Caerleon, as its Welsh name implies, represents ' the camp of the legion '—in particular, of the Second ' Augustan ' or ' Royal ' Legion, which made its home there at some uncertain date between 50 and 75 A.D. This legion had formed part of the Roman army of conquest in the year 43, when it was led by a future Emperor of Rome across the south of England; and, in one place or an.other, it remained in Britain until the fourth or perhaps the beginning of the fifth century. How long it was actually stationed at Caerleon we do not know, but its arrival on the banks of the Usk (whence the new fortress received the name ' Isca ') was of twofold significance. It marked in effect the
344
