NOTES AND NEWS
  
one hundred C14 dates available for this period, places the Linear Pottery at 4500—3900 BC (Neustupnj, 1968). If the proposed corrections to the C14 dates based on tree-rings are made, the 'long' chronology places Linea.r Pottery at 5300—4700 BC (Neustupnj, 1969; 1970). The 'short' chronology places the Linear Pottery at about 2900—2700 BC (Milojöié, 1961). A good discussion of the 'long' and 'short' chronology arguments was given by Quitta (1967).
  The thermoluminescent dates are closest to the tree-ring corrected C14 dates, but it must be emphasized that, because of the experimental error in the TL method, they are also consistent with the uncorrected C14 dates. 'I'he thermoluminescent results are not consistent with the 'short' chronology. Since the 'fine-grain' thermoluminescent method is absolute (i.e. does not require any calibration by material of known age) and is independent of the C14 method, these results provide strong support for a 'long' chronology.
We are grateful to Professor C. F. C.
Hawkes and Dr M. J. Aitken for suggesting this application and thank Professor P. J. C. Modderman, Dr B. Soudsky, and Dr Pavlu for kindly supplying the sherds and permission to quote preliminary results from their sites.
AITKEN, M. J., D. W. ZIMMERMAN and S. J. FLEMING. 1968. Thermoluminescent Dating of Ancient Pottery, Nature, 219, 442—5.
MILOJölé, v. 1961. Zur Anwendbarkeit der C14Datierung in der Vorgeschichtsforschung, Ger
mania, pt. 3, xxxrx, 434—52.
NEUSTUPN+, E. 1968. Absolute Chronology of the Neolithic and Aeneolithic Periods in Central and South-Eastern Europe, Slovenskå Archaeologiå, xvl-l, 19—60.
1969. Absolute Chronology of the Neolithic and Aeneolithic Periods in Central and South-East Europe Il, Archeologické Rozhledy, xx1-6, 783—810.
r 970. A New Epoch in Radiocarbon Dating, Antiquity, XLIV, 38—45.
QUITTA, H. 1967. The C14 Chronology of the Central and S.E. European Neolithic, Antiquity, XLI, 263—70.
Annual Symposium on Archaeometry and ArchaeologicalZIMMERMAN, D. W. 1970. Thermoluminescent Dating Using Fine Grains from Pottery, Archaeometry, 12(2), in press.
  
Prospection
The 1971 Symposium will be held in Oxford on Friday, 19 March and Saturday, 20 March. The first day will be reserved for specialist research reports and the second day will be more orientated to non-specialists. Intending speakers are asked to write to Dr M. J. Aitken Stonehenge at Midsummer
With the permission of Karl Miller, Editor of ' The Listener ' and of that distinguishedjournalist René Cutforth, we republish Cutforth's fascinating account of his experiences at Stonehenge on Midsummer Night (see Editorial, p. 253), His talk on Radio 4 was printed in ' The Listener' on 16 July 1970.
I spent Midsummer Night at Stonehenge, because I'd never seen the farce that goes on there nowadays, though years ago I'd seen the sun rise over the hele stone. It was a marvellous exposition, a British Expo 70 of the time we live in. For a start they've now dug a square before 10 January 1971. Details and registration forms will be available during February from the Symposium Secretary, Research Laboratory for Archaeology, 6 Keble Road, Oxford, OXI 3QJ. Please enclose stamped addressed envelope.
tunnel under the road to save people from traffc accidents. It has not, in fact, done this, one of the offcials told me, because, first of all, the visitors see Stonehenge on the other side of the road and they cross over to it, from the carpark, dodging the traffc, and then they are told that the entrance is now on the other side of the road, so they cross again, taking two chances.
ANTIQUITY  Half-way through the square-cut concrete tunnel under the road—a brutal thing altogether characteristic of our dreadful times—there was a checkpoint. The whole business of getting into Stonehenge at about two in the morning on Midsummer Night was a sort of parody of the cross-over ceremonial between East and West Berlin Checkpoint Charlie. Police, with or without dogs, checked and counter-checked our passes, with some committed woman personally checking them all over again herself after the police had had their go, and with a beady eye. Stonehenge was entirely surrounded by coils of Danaert wire, with floodlights in a circle inside the barbed-wire fence. It was patrolled by men in uniform with Alsatian dogs. 'Achtung! Der Hund ist IOS', I said to myself. It was exactly like the prisoner-of-war camp in Germany which I spent a couple of years in during the last war, except that the prisoners in this case were outside: they were all barred out. Hundreds of hippy families slept on the ground, a big crowd leaned up against fences outside the Danaert wire, singing and chi-yiking. Inside were the press, the television, the police, the Alsatians, those with passes from the Amesbury Council,

and, a little late, the Druids.
  There were fifty or sixty Druids as far as I could judge, and some of them were girls, and many of them quite young. They wore robes which owed a good deal to concepts of the Ancient Egyptians, and some of them carried ceremonial banners depicting square arches like the trilithons of Stonehenge, or the tunnel under the road. The cult was founded at the end of the 18th century, when the romantic imagination caught up in a big way with the henges. Since absolutely nothing was known about prehistoric England in those days except Caesar's Commentaries, it was natural to ascribe everything to Druids, since Caesar had been impressed by them. The fact that it has been known during the whole of this century, anyway, that Stonehenge was completed a good thousand years before any Druids arrived in this country seems to have bounced off these intrepid ceremonialists like water off a duck's back. They solemnly marched in procession this way and that, circulating in various parts of the enclosure, occasionally mounting a ceremonial guard of three in selected positions, all with an effect of high religious dedication. Someone's tape-player had been thinly droning out into the cold mists of early morning when we arrived. 'The answer, my friend, is blowing in the wind, the answer is blowing in the wind.'
  This musical offering was only varied by announcements through the loudspeakers. 'Will people with passes from Amesbury
Council please cross the road.' 'Will Jim and Doris please join Sandra in the carpark.' 'Those with Druid passes should assemble now.' A thin fog settled on Stonehenge like a cold poultice. The vision of capering, naked maenads dancing ring o' roses round the trilithons in a flickering bonfire light was now seen and felt to be a piece of wishful thinking a thumping lie, in fact. 'We needn't have been here for another two hours', I said to a member of the television crew. 'Or ever', he replied crisply. Then the Druids lined up for their procession, two abreast. 'The answer, my friend' stopped blowing in the wind, and a section of the wired-off crowd, almost invisible behind the floodlights, began a lively and un-
friendly rendering of 'Oh, oh, the Hokey Cokey' as the Druids began their ceremonial walkabout. As they formed and re-formed in no doubt highly symbolical groupings, snatches of their liturgy came floating through the mist. It seemed predictable stuff. 'Came from the AllHigh in the golden age when the mysteries were revealed 'Right leg out and shake it all about
NOTES AND NEWS  'It's nothing new', one of the offcials said. 'They've been baiting the Druids on Midsummer Night here for 60 years now. It never gets really nasty. We've got the wire because some yobbos painted the stones one year. It keeps 17 policemen up all night, though, and turns the Chief Constable livid.' The police strolled about with their silent dogs, friendly and accessible, as if they had some vested interest in making out that the whole scene was quite sane really. And after what seemed a few weeks of limbo a grey light began to percolate through a sky of frosted glass, and the Druids assembled inside the stone circle to watch for the sunrise over the hele stone. As the moment of climax drew nearer their verse-style grew more and more tatty. 'Hark, oh Spirit, and hear us now concerning this our sacred vow' (or 'sacred cow', it may have been). '()h, oh, the Hokey Cokey. . . . ' Soon the sun was being ordered in round terms to rise and shine. It took not a blind bit of notice. The lavatorywindow sky refused to reveal its source of light, and soon the general squalor of Sl:onehenge's modern setting was pitilessly presented without any blessing of sunshine. The Hokey Cokey died away. The hippies stood looking liverish in the cheerless light. The Druids, who it was now revealed were certainly not advertising any
Pliocene Men
After my note on man the skilled tool-maker had been published in ANTIQUITY last September (1969, 222—3), news came that during 1969 Mr R. E. F. Leakey had discovered stone artifacts in stratified tuff in the Koobi Fora area, East Rudolf, Northern Kenya, and furthermore that Dr F. J. Fitch and Dr J. A. Miller had dated this tuff by its radiogenic argon as 261 million years old (Leakey et al., 1970, 226—8). Taking 2 million argon-years before present as the most acceptable chronometric boundary between the Pliocene and Pleistocene periods, the East Rudolf artifacts can be accepted as evidence that man the skilled tool-maker already existed in Central Africa during Pliocene times.
  In January (1970), Dr Mary Leakey visited the Anthropology Sub-Department of the British Museum (Natural History) and gave me an opportunity to examine fibreglass casts of some of the artifacts which her eldest son had found at Koobi Fora. She had undertaken to prepare a report on this importanl: archaeological discovery, and this has since been published in Nature (Leakey et al., 1970, 228—30).
  Mary Leakey told me that she believed some authorities on the Palaeolithic would find diffculty in accepting the East Rudolf artifacts as the work of Pliocene hominids because at first sight they looked more sophisticated than the Oldowan industry at the type-site in Tanzania dating from about million years later. I have been inclined to be a severe critic of controversial stone flakings when their detergent, began to go through the motions of forming a column back to the bus park. The cameramen began to pack up, yawning. For about a minute the whole bedlamite confusion of our time was held up to view in all its listless vacancy, and then the tableau began slowly to dissolve. Throughout the whole operation Stonehenge had never seemed for a moment to be involved. Something of another order, it had simply refused to have any truck with us at all.
acceptance would unexpectedly extend in space or time the range of man the tool-maker. The Editor has generously invited me to write this further note with comments on the significance of the new finds from the point of their being the oldest known artifacts.
  The Koobi Fora artifacts include 'pebbletools', strictly speaking small choppers made out of flaked cobbles. These were collected on the surface of the dated tuff close to where flakes of identical material had been found in situ. After studying Mary Leakey's report on the artifacts I have no doubt that they form items in a single industry. One of the most critical pieces is a flake found in the tuff at a depth of about a metre. It is a 'refresher' flake, that is to say a flake of the kind struck off in re-sharpening a chopper of the kind of which a number were found on the nearby surface. Considered together the Koobi Fora artifacts conform to the well-defined Oldowan pebbletool tradition typically represented in the Lower Pleistocene lacustrine layers which form Bed I in the Olduvai Gorge sequence, Tanzania. The explanation of the fact that the East Rudolf artifacts look more sophisticated than the considerably later Oldowan assemblages hitherto known is not that they represent the work of craftsmen with any greater skill, but simply that they were made in rock that was more readily flaked. The Oldowan artifacts from Olduvai I are in vein quartz and relatively coarse-grained volcanic rocks, whereas those at East Rudolf are in exceedingly fine-grained, homogeneous volcanic rock (trachyandesite),
305
  
305
  
305
  
