ANTIQUITY
STONEHENGE: A SUGGESTION
The recent Guide to Stonehenge, by Prof. R. J. C. Atkinson, published by H.M. Stationery Offce, raises some unanswered problems about the 'blue stones'. We may accept the evidence of petrologists that these stones came from the Presely Mountains, and the practical evidence, given in the Guide, that their transport was possible. The reader is left to assume that the intending builders of Stonehenge went to Presely, quarried the stones and brought them to the site on the Wiltshire Downs. No reason is assigned for this lapse into the larger lunacy. Nor, I think, could any reason be adduced. The only reason that I can imagine for this prodigious expenditure of labour is that the tribes of Wessex (to use an anachronism) made a large-scale attack on those of South Wales, utterly defeated them, and in order to mark the completeness of their victory and also to acquire additional spiritual strength, demolished and carried off, largely with the slave labour of the defeated Britons, an existing 'temple' of widely renowned sanctity. This, after all, is the basic tradition embroidered by Geoffrey of Monmouth. Certainly Geoffrey's standard of truthfulness was noticeably lower than that of George Washington: but it does not follow that there was no foundation for a tradition which seems to fit the facts, or at least the possibilities.
  The question is—where are we to look for this non-existent monument? Fortunately, holes in the ground are among the most indestructible of archaeological remains. There are some sixty blue stones at Stonehenge; allowing for a fairly heavy percentage of losses in transit, there ought to be a site marked by perhaps 80 to 100 holes. These one would expect to take the form of a single or double circle; though the possibility of avenues such as are found in Brittany cannot be ruled out. I suggest that a meticulous examination of air photographs covering say twenty miles or so round Presely might reveal the site. As a mere guess, I should favour the Newport-Fishguard region—a district strong in megalithic remains—and especially such sites as Dinas Head and Pen Caer; these seem suitable for a ritual sanctuary, they would be convenient for sea transport, and their position would fall in with the early tradition that the stones of Stonehenge came 'from Ireland'.
                                                          L. F. SALZMAN Professor R. J. C. Atkinson writes: There is nothing new in the idea that the stones were brought to Stonehenge as the disjecta membra of a pre-existing monument; but it would be necessary to accept this hypothesis only if it could be shown that on arrival at least some of them had already been dressed to shape. Other possible explanations are discussed briefly in my Stonehenge (original edition of 1956, 173—5 ; Pelican edition, 175—6).
ART IN ROMAN BRITAIN	PLATE xxxll
This Exhibition (to which reference was made in ANTIQUITY 1961, 85) was held in the Goldsmiths Hall in London from 26 June to 22 July, and was admirably displayed and well attended. A full illustrated account of this exhibition, edited and with an introduction by Professor Toynbee, is being published by the Phaidon Press next year. We publish here (PLATE XXXII), in a fine photograph kindly provided by the Gloucester City Museum, one object from the exhibition—the stone head of a man dating from the first century A.D. found at Gloucester itself. It is 8 in. high and still bears traces of red colouring; the catalogue to the Exhibition refers to the Celtic traits namely 'the patterned hair, bulging lentoid eyes, stylised ears, slit-like mouth and tapering face'. The head was first published in Trans. Bristol and Gloucester Arch. Soc., 1934 (78 and pl. VIll), and again described in the Journal of Roman Studies, 1935 (218 and pl. 37), and by Sir Thomas Kendrick in his Anglo-Saxon Art (1938) where (p. 13) he calls it 'a surprising piece'. Perhaps the interest and surprises in this Exhibition may stir somebody to organise an exhibition of pre-Roman art in Britain. 10,984 people visited Goldsmiths Hall in the 23 days of the Exhibition.
246
