Notes and News
STONEHENGE RESTORED
Within the last century there have been many proposals that the stones which have fallen at Stonehenge in comparatively recent times should be re-erected. These plans referred mainly to the sarsen trilithon (stones 57, 58 and 158) which fell outwards ' with a very sensible concussion or jarring of the ground ' on 3 January, 1797, and to one of the uprights and its attached lintel (stones 22 and 122) which collapsed in a violent gale on the last day of 1900. On falling, this lintel struck the already fallen trilithon and broke into two pieces, and it is thought that it may have been cracked as early as 1655. Stone 21, another upright of the outer circle, was left in a leaning position by the collapse of stone 22 and lintel 122. Following excavations at Stonehenge by Professor Stuart Piggott, Professor R. J. C. Atkinson, and the late Dr J. F. S. Stone, the Society of Antiquaries recommended to the Ministry of Works that the six stones already mentioned should be re-erected. While they endorsed the Ministry of Works policy of preserving the majority of displaced stones in their existing fallen position as a survival of damage in ancient times, the Ancient Monuments Board agreed with the recommendation of the Society of Antiquaries to raise only the stones fallen in recent times. The Minister of Works accepted the Board's advice; the matter was discussed in the House of Commons (Hansard 585, no 86 ; ANTIQUITY, 1958, 68) ; work began at Stonehenge in March 1958 and was completed in June.
  Besides restoring the circle to the appearance it presented before the events of 1797 and 1900, the 1958 operations enabled the better preservation of the prehistoric carvings recently found on stone 57 which were being gradually obliterated by the feet of visitors walking across them. One of these is the bouclier-écusson or petit marmite symbol of the south Breton Passage Grave art, and may be a stylized representative of the MotherGoddess figure so realistically represented in some of the Marne rock-cut tombs and on the underside of the capstone of the Déhus in Guernsey (see R. J. C. Atkinson, Stonehenge, 1956, 30ff; and Crawford, ANTIQUITY, 1954, 25ff).
  The weight of the stones being re-erected at Stonehenge (two of them weighed as much as 45 tons each) made their withdrawal and re-erection a feat of considerable diffculty, the responsibility for which has rested upon the architect in charge of Ancient Monuments at the Ministry of Works, in consultation with the Ministry's engineers. For the lifting and reinstatement of the larger stones a 60-ton mobile crane was borrowed from the Ministry of Supply, smaller cranes being used for the lighter lifts and general site work. A 4-ton steel frame with twelve spring-loaded lifting points was specially designed for the withdrawal of the stones from their fallen position. For their re-erection a steel ' corset ' was made in two halves in such a way that any of the larger stones could be clamped within the  corset ' without harm to their surfaces. The frontispiece shows the 1958 restorations at Stonehenge in progress.
  During these restorations excavations were conducted by Professor Piggott and Professor Atkinson ; their main purpose was to identify and excavate the stoneholes of the stones to be re-erected—which have now been bedded in reinforced concrete. Unconnected with the primary purpose of the 1958 excavations a small excavation was made around the Altar Stone in order to ascertain its precise shape and dimensions, nowhere previously recorded. A thick layer of disturbed modern soil was found around the stone, and initials of late 17th century type cut on the edge of the stone on the south-west side show that at that date it lay clear of the turf, and has since become buried. The stone proved to have one squared end and one trimmed obliquely, and must have stood upright at some stage of the monument's history. Behind it, on the axis immediately to the south-west, were the remains of a much mutilated hole in which it may have originally stood.
  An archaeological observation of some interest was made when the Outer Circle lintel 122 came to be lifted and studied for re-setting. Instead of one pair of mortice-holes on the underside, there were two pairs at different spacings and of differing depths—one shallow and one deeper pair. The circumstances suggest that the Outer Circle lintels were dressed and ' prefabricated ' to the extent of having mortices at standard spacing cut in them, before they were actually measured for fit on their uprights, and that anything approximating to a  closing error ' in the calculated spacing would need rectification, as in this instance.
  The public interest in the 1958 work at Stonehenge was reflected in the figures of visitors. Always the second most visited Ancient Monument in Britain (the Tower of London is the first), 90,000 more people visited Stonehenge between January and September 1958 inclusive than the 211,670 who visited it in the comparable nine months of 1957. During March, April and May, while the work Was in its earlier stages, the number of visitors was double that of the same months in 1957. 
  The Editor is grateful to the Ministry of Works and Professor Piggott for supplying the information on which the above note is based and the photograph reproduced as the frontispiece of this issue and volume of ANTIQUITY. Professor Piggott points out that one of the minor and incidental results of the 1958 restoration of Stonehenge is to make out of date the device which has graced the cover of ANTIQUITY for thirty-two years since its foundation in 1927. We have therefore asked Mr Brian Hope Taylor to produce a new device for us of Stonehenge Restored, and the discerning reader will already have noticed the difference on the cover. The original cover was designed by Mr Ellis Martin of the Ordnance Survey.
SCHOOLS OF ARCHAEOLOGY IN MAN AND WALES, 1959
The British Summer School of Archaeology meets each year at a different centre and a specific topic or problem is chosen as the theme of a series of lectures, discussions and excursions. In 1959 two such Schools will take place, the first in the Isle of Man between 4 and 11 April, and the second, to deal with Prehistoric and Roman Wales, at Bangor, Caernarvonshire, between 8 and 15 August. The meeting at Douglas, which will discuss the archaeology of the Isle of Man, includes as lecturers Professor Dr Gerhard Bersu, Dr N. K. Chadwick, Mr A. M. Cubbon, Mr Peter Gelling, Mr B. R. S. Megaw, Mr C. A. Ralegh Radford and Dr F. T. Wainwright. The Bangor meeting will be opened by Sir Mortimer Wheeler, and the lecturers will include Dr Charles McBurney, Professor Grimes, Dr Savory, Mr A. H. A. Hogg, Professor Ian Richmond, Mr Leslie Alcock, Professor Idris Foster, Professor R. J. C. Atkinson and Dr Glyn Daniel. The latest day for enrolment for the Isle of Man meeting is the date of the publication of this issue of ANTIQUITY, namely 1 March, but applications from readers of ANTIQUITY who have not heard of the the scheme until they read these words will be accepted if they write at once to the Honorary Director (Dr F. T. Wainwright, Ingleby, Newport-on-Tay, Fife). The latest date for the Bangor meeting, which is being held in association with the University of Wales, is 1 May, 1959.
EARLY SHIPPING IN EGYPT
In his article on ' Early Shipping in the Near East ' in ANTIQUITY XXXII, pp. 220 ff., Dr Barnett has revived and attributed to his colleague Mr T. G. H. James that hoary delusion that the boats on the Decorated vases of the Gerzean period may not be boats but stockades, the chief reason for which is the artistic licence which may have given those boats more oars than they actually had. Any doubts as to their being boats should be set at rest by comparing an Amratian shallow oval dish, which has a plan of a boat painted on it (FIG. 1), with one of the boats on a typical early Gerzean pot (FIG. 2). 12 This comparison was made in 1933 by Flinders Petrie in an article, on ' Egyptian Shipping .
FIG. 1 (half actual size).
  These boats on Gerzean pots are of the greatest interest, and from the fact that over one of the two cabins or shrines, which they always carry, is nearly always placed the emblem of a divinity (sometimes but not always recognizable as the emblem of a divinity known in historic times, e.g. Neith, Hat-hor, Min or Hofus), I am inclined to think that the inspiration for these boats may have come, as the idea of painting designs on pots must have come, from Iraq. The reason for the boats, and indeed for all the other designs on the Decorated pots, is thus probably a magic one. Indeed it is not unlikely that these pots were solely intended for burial with the dead. The boat may be the boat of life, and that may explain why, on the earliest Decorated pots, it carries clearly recognizable vegetation sprouting from its prow, not intended either as a sail or as a shelter for the steersman, as has been sometimes suggested.
  On two well-known cylinder seals from Iraq 3—Frankfort attributes them to the Uruk period and Contenau to the Jemdet Nasr period 4 and so contemporary with the Gerzean period in Egypt—the reeds, of which the boat is made, appear to be sprouting, often at the prow. On the seal here illustrated (FIG. 3) the boat, besides carrying a divinity, carries a cabin or shrine and also the shrine of the goddess Inanna on the back of a bull. It seems to me that we have in these prehistoric Iraq boats the probable prototype of the vegetation at the prow and of the two cabins or shrines, one with the sign of a divinity—with streamers perhaps deriving from the tail of the well-known emblem of Inanna—on the Decorated pots from Egypt. (The occurrence of shrines of divinities on boats in prehistoric times must be connected with the fact that in the historic period in Egypt, the image of a deity was usually carried in a shrine on a large model boat on the shoulders of a number of priests, as is represented frequently on the walls of temples, at Luxor and Karnak for instance.)
FIG. 2. Boat on typical early Gerzean pot (half actual size).
FIG. 3. Boat on cylinder seal from Iraq (enlarged).
  In this connection, it is interesting to note that Prof. H. Larsen has recently produced important support for Vivi Laurent-Tackholm's identification of the plant, which often appears on Decorated pots along with the boats, and was previously thought to be the aloe, as Musa ensete, a giant banana known in 17th-century Abyssinia as the ' tree against hunger ' from its many uses for food and shelter.5 It would seem therefore to be represented on these pots also for a magic reason (to provide the dead with food and perhaps also with means of shelter).
  Incidentally Dr Barnett is incorrect in attributing the earliest known representation of an Egyptian ship with a sail to ' an Amratian vase dated to c. 3500 B.C.'. It actually occurs on a Late Gerzean vase, probably to be dated nearer 3100 B.C., which is correctly described by Childe, 6 as a ' late Decorated pot '.
A. J. ARKELL
  

EXCAVATIONS AT BIGO, UGANDA
The large earthwork site at Bigo (or Biggo) on the Katonga river in Uganda has been known since 1909 and has already been described in this Journal and elsewhere,l and an air photograph published. 2

  As the major ancient site of Post-Paleolithic times in Uganda, and as one presenting an obvious problem as to use and date in a country where so little is known, the new Antiquities organization of the Uganda Government chose it as the first site to be excavated in a planned scheme of field work intended to throw light on the prehistoric Iron Age of this part of Africa.
  Legend has long associated Bigo with the people well known in the mythology of the area as the Bachwezi. Who the Bachwezi were and when they flourished are among the chief problems of Uganda's history, but the general concensus of opinion is that they were a cattle-owning, warrior aristocracy coming from the North (perhaps from south-west Abyssinia) and dominating the settled agriculturalists of Western Uganda. It may be that the present-day Bahima, nomadic and cattle-owning and of a markedly different physical aspect from the Bantu peoples amongst whom they live, are descendants of these Bachwezi. The Bigo earthworks enclose an immense area and, with the limited resources available, only a small preliminary investigation could be carried out.
  Attention was concentrated on the centre of the enclosure where earlier visitors had identified two mounds (the ' bumps ' of Wayland's plan) (FIG. 1). Clearance of the bush in this central area which took two weeks hard work by some twenty men, revealed that there were three mounds in the area enclosed by a ditch with a gap in it at the south side of Mound A (FIG. 2). The stretches of ditch to the south of the mounds were almost completely silted up, and differ markedly from the other ditches of the site which, though heavily overgrown, still retain almost their original profiles.
  A trench was dug across this ditch and into Mound A, the largest of the three. This mound, shown after clearance of the bush to be almost flat-topped, was found to have been made of the material (gneiss) dug from the ditch. It is entirely man-made and was thrown up in one single operation; although tip lines can be seen in the section there is no stratification or change in the material of which it is made. This material was almost completely sterile and only a very few sherds were found in it, The purpose of a large mound of this type is not clear, though Dr Mathew's suggestion that it was the foundation for a hut seems probable. Circumstances did not allow of the clearance of the top of the mound to find the post holes which alone could give certainty to this view.
  The most surprising discovery was that the silted ditch went down to a depth of twelve feet : cut into solid rock on which pick marks could be seen, it is most impressive testimony to the ability of its creators. The reason for the silting of this part of the ditch complex was soon clear. It had been used as a rubbish tip and the whole of the silt was full of pottery, animal bone and a few iron implements.
  The pottery is similar to that from Ntusi already briefly described by Dr Mathew, his Class C being by far the most common. A great deal of it is decorated on the outside by streaks of red paint apparently applied by dipping the fingers in the paint and using them as a brush ; in a few cases merely the paint-covered finger tips have been applied. In addition to this rather coarse and gritty ware a much finer red ware, often highly burnished, was found, as well as examples of a fine unburnished black ware. Few complete pots were found. Of them the most interesting is a peculiarly shaped pot open at both ends and
Rev. G. Mathew, ANTIQUITY, 108, pp. 215—7.
 E. J. Wayland, Uganda Journal, 2 (1934—5), pp. 21—32 (with a plan reproduced as fig. 1 above). a ANTIWITY, 108, pl. 111.
pierced for suspension at the narrow end (FIG. 3, a). The purpose of such a pot is most obscure; it has been suggested that it is a- fumigator, but it is diffcult to see how it could be so used. 7
	FIG. 2.	
  The iron implements consist of spear and arrow heads, knives and razors. One of the arrow heads (FIG. 3, b) is of the special wedge-shaped type still used by the Bahima for making incisions in the necks of their cattle to draw off the blood which is an important part of this tribe's diet. It is, therefore, an indication that identification of Bachwezi with Bahima may be correct. The excavation at Bigo, though modest in its intention and results, has made available for study the first considerable collection of material from the prehistoric Iron Age of Uganda. A distinctive culture has been revealed, and it should be possible, with properly planned field work, to define its geographical extent. What is now required is further excavation at Bigo, especially on the mounds, and an examination of the other earthworks to the north running up to the east shore of Lake Albert 4 to see if they also belong to what may be tentatively described as the Bachwezi culture.
  Dating is a problem to which no answer can yet be given. No datable material was found at Bigo and, though not impossible, it is unlikely that imported objects of known date came into this part of Africa more than a hundred years ago. Uganda, far in the interior (it is some 800 miles of hard going from Bigo to the coast) seems to have had little or no contact with the cultural influences that affected Africa's east coast. Ethnic movements seem in the main to have been from the north, and the evidence for the dating of Uganda's Iron Age material may be waiting to be found in south-west Abyssinia and the southern Sudan.

	(a)	(b)
FIG. 3. (a) Pot of unknown use (see p. 56) (X b); (b) Wedge-shaped arrow head (see p. 56) (21 in. long).
  The traditional stories of the Bachwezi suggest that they were at the height of their power some 500 years ago and, in default of any positive evidence to the contrary, that date may be allowed to stand. There is at least nothing in the archaeological material found to make such a date impossible.
P. L. SHINNIE
THE ARIAN AND ORTHODOX BAPTISTERIES AT SALONA
In his History of Salonitan Christianityl M. Dyggve raises an interesting problem in connexion with the Arian baptistery at Salona. He points out that the Arian and orthodox basilicas have been built according to the same plan, that both are similarly oriented, and that both have an octagonal baptistery on the north side containing a cruciform font. The only noticeable distinction between the two complexes is to be found in the position of the steps leading down into the piscinae. In the Arian baptistery they descend from north to south, while in the Nicene they are from west to east (FIG. 1). M. Dyggve considers that this difference cannot be accidental, and suggests that its cause may probably be found in a diversity of ritual practice.
  That the Arian baptismal ritual differed in certain particulars from the Nicene is made quite clear by the literary records. Thus we learn from Epiphanius2 and from Theodore 1 Oslo, 1951, pp. 53 f.
P.c., 42.637B.
Lector3 that the Arians used an irregular formula, baptizing not into the threefold Name but either ' through the Son in the Spirit ' or ' into the death of Christ '. Several writers also report that only one immersion was practised instead of the threefold immersion customary in the Catholic Church.8 Finally, Epiphanius records the peculiar behaviour of a section of the Arians who turned their candidates upside down for the administration of the rite. 5

FIG. 1. The orthodox and Arian fonts at Salona.
  These are the only differences recorded, and it is reasonable to suppose that there were no others, since the orthodox writers would not have hesitated to have attacked their opponents for any and every divergence from current practice. The argumentum e silentio is unquestionably valid in this instance. But no single one of these differences listed above requires a special architectural arrangement, and we must therefore conclude that M. Dyggve is incorrect in his suggestion that the distinction between the orthodox and Arian baptisteries was due to a difference of liturgical practice, Is there then an alternative explanation which does full justice to the facts ?
  The Arian baptistery is older than the Nicene by something like a quarter of a century; the latter was at first a rectangular structure and was not transformed into its final octagonal shape until A.D. 500—550. 6 It is then to the Arian baptistery, as the earlier, that we must first direct our attention. In adopting the octagonal plan the architect was in accord with many of his orthodox predecessors, and was no doubt influenced, like them, by the mystical reference to the eighth day as the day of Christ's Resurrection. 9 He constructed the font in the shape of a cross, and here again he was making no innovation. He had next to provide steps leading down into the piscina, and here one must ask if he had any precedents to guide him as to their exact position.
  The two points of the compass mentioned in connexion with Baptism are the East and the West. The candidate was required to face the West for his renunciation of Satan and then to turn East for his profession of adherence to Christ. This however took place, according to Cyril of Jerusalem, not by the font but in one of the outer chambers of the baptistery (Tdv aportfÄzov). 8 But both the Arian and the Nicene baptisteries have these adjoining rooms, so that no special orientation of the font, or of the building as a whole, would be required for the purposes of these ritual acts. Moreover, the Testamentum Domini, a Syriac document of the 5th century, in its description of how to build a church, emphasizes the need for the sanctuary to be at the east end, but, in referring to the
P.c., 86.i.196B.
baptistery, lays down no rules as to its interior disposition. 9 The general impression would therefore seem to be that the architect was entirely free to arrange the font as he chose. A comparison of certain other fonts,10 excavated elsewhere, will confirm this impression.
  At Castiglione there is a round font into which one can descend by four separate little steps, projecting beyond the circle and so forming a cross; those on the north-east and south-west are rounded, and those on the north-west and south-east are rectangular

	(d) Tipasa	(e) Morsott	(f) 'Amwås

(g) Gerasa, St John the	(h) Gerasa, St Theodore	(i) S'baita Baptist
FIG. 2. Comparative table of fonts (North as for Fig. 1).
small stairway of three steps from the south-west (FIG. 2, b). At Tigzirt (FIG. 2, c) and Tipasa (FIG. 2, d) the fonts have three steps completely circling the interior. In the large basilica at Morsott the font is rectangular with two continuous interior steps (FIG. 2, e). At 'Amwås the font is quatrefoil and one enters by two steps in the north-west arm of the cross (FIG. 2, f).
 Gerasa, ed. C. H. Kraeling, 1938, pp. 175 f.
At Gerasa, in the church of St John the Baptist, the font is also quatrefoil and one enters by single steps from the north-east and from the south-west respectively (FIG. 2, g), while the oval font in St Theodore's is entered by a series of three or four steps from the same points of the compass (FIG. 2, h). At S'baita, in the baptistery of the north church, there is a font in the form of a Maltese cross with steps leading down inside the east and west arms (FIG. 2, i).
  There is scarcely any need to continue this list, since suffcient evidence has now been adduced to show that architects in the 4th, 5th, and 6th centuries, in different parts of the Empire, felt themselves to be under no restrictions as to either the shape or the location of the steps of the fonts they had constructed. We may assume therefore that the person responsible for the Arian baptistery arranged it according to either his own wishes or those of his employer, with no obligation imposed by ritual or traditional practice. Since he made use of the Latin cross with equal arms there was also no formal necessity compelling him to place the steps in any one particular position.
  The architect of the Nicene baptistery quite obviously intended to build something bigger and better than that devised by his heretical opponent. Thus, not only did he transform the previously existing small rectangular building, but he made his resulting octagon larger. In front he placed a handsome prostasis, while inside there was arranged a circle of graceful columns. The architect also chose for the shape of his font the Greek cross, but no doctrinal significance can be attached to this alteration. The adoption of this shape may well have been influenced by the construction of the cruciform church which is immediately adjacent to the bishop's basilica on the south. These two buildings were originally basilicae geminatae, i.e. twin-churches. But in the first half of the 6th century, at the same time as the reconstruction of the orthodox baptistery, the southern basilica was also refashioned and assumed the form of the Greek cross. It is not impossible, therefore, that the shape of the font was influenced by the plan of the transformed basilica—the architect was probably the same for both—and one would expect the former to be orientated in the same way as the church which it reproduces in miniature, i.e. towards the east. Since the Greek cross has one arm longer than the other three, symmetry requires the placing of the steps, if there is to be a single flight, in the longer one, and in this case in the western one. I would suggest that this interpretation of the archaeological remains is all that is necessary to explain the differences and similarities between the Arian and orthodox baptisteries at Salona, without our having recourse to the hypothesis tentatively suggested by M. Dyggve, for which indeed there is no evidence.
J. G. DAVIES
PREHISTORIC DENMARK
A correspondent points out that in his review of Prehistoric Man in Denmark by Kurt Bröste, with J. B. Jørgensen, C. J. Becker, and J. Brøndsted (ANTIQUITY, 1958, 127), Professor Carleton S. Coon contends that the bearers of Neolithic culture in Denmark were different from those of the Mesolithic age, whereas it is one of the remarkable results of anthropological research that it has been practically impossible to establish any difference between Mesolithic and Early Neolithic population in Denmark. Coon states ' the four authenticated Mesolithic skeletons are Stasevang, Kelderød, and Døjrimge I and Il. The four Early Neolithic ones are Koelbjerg, Ravnstrup, Vedbaek, and Korsør Nor '. Our correspondent is anxious that readers of Professor Coon's review in ANTIQUITY should realize that the Mesolithic skeletons are Koelbjerg, Ravnstrup, Vedbaek, and Korsør Nor, whereas Stasevang, Kelderød, and Døringe I and Il are Early Neolithic.
EARLY COPPER WORKING IN EUROPE
Miss Beatrice Blance, of the Department of Prehistoric Archaeology in the University of Edinburgh, sends this note reporting on a conference held to discuss the beginning of copper metallurgy in Europe.
  On 5 and 6 July, 1958, in the Württembergischen Landesmuseum in Stuttgart, a small conference was held by invitation of the Deutschen Forschungsgemeinschaft to discuss the problems of the beginnings and spread of metallurgical techniques in Europe and the Near East.
  The conference was organized by the Arbeitsgemeinschaft zur Spektralanalytischen Untersuchen von Metallgegenständen der Kupfer und Frühbronzezeit, which is financed by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft and promoted by CIPHS-UNESCO. The Arbeitsgemeinschaft consists of Prof. Dr K. Bittel, Istanbul; Dr S. Junghans, Stuttgart; Dr H. Otto, Leuna; Prof. Dr E. Sangmeister, Freiburg; and Dr M. Schroeder, Stuttgart. The following were also invited to take part: B. Blance, Edinburgh; C. Cullberg, Lund ; Prof. Dr W. Dehn, Marburg; Dr J. Heseman, Krefeld; Dr H. J. Hundt, Mainz; Prof. Dr W. Kimmig, Tübingen; Dr Krämer, Frankfurt; Prof. Dr V. Milojöié, Saarbrucken ; and E. Neuffer and F. Schubert, Freiburg.
  Dr Junghans, in opening the conference, welcomed the guests and regretted that owing either to illness or to pressure of work, Mr Case, Oxford, and Prof. Tackenberg and Dr Treue were unable to be present. The past, present and future work of the Arbeitsgemeinschaft was then discussed by Dr Junghans, who described how between 1947 and 1951 he, together with Dr Klein and Dr Scheufele, had developed a method which, with the help of quantitative spectrographic analysis, showed metal groups, which reflect a uniform processing technique of the original raw material.l By this means it is possible to work out the centres of manufacture of prehistoric copper objects. Thanks to the support of the Conseil Permanent de l'Union Internationale des Sciences Préhistoriques et Protohistoriques, samples have been taken and analysed from the following countries : Austria, France, Germany, Gt Britain, Holland, Ireland, Italy, Portugal, Spain, Switzerland and Yugoslavia. H. J. Case (Oxford), J. R. Maréchal (Dives-sur-Mer) and I. Marovié (Split), have also allowed their results to be used by the Arbeitsgemeinschaft. Dr Junghans then went on to discuss the possibility of extending the work to Turkey and the Near East, with the aim of finding out where copper was first obtained and worked and how fast the knowledge of copper working spread and in which directions.
  The technical processes involved in making an analysis were described by Dr Schroeder, who then went on to explain in simplified language the statistical method by which the metal groups were worked out, after which the guests were taken on a conducted tour of the laboratory.
  Prof. Sangmeister, who has been working on the historical implications of the analyses, presented his ideas and conclusions in the evening session. 2 He first pointed out that in order to use these statistically-determined groups, it was important to keep in mind the limitations of the evidence. Single analyses have no value, except when they belong to certain clearly defined metal groups, and besides this only general statements can be obtained. The density of distribution of any group must be calculated in order to show
  1 Junghans, Klein and Scheufele, Untersuchen zur Kupfer und Frühronzezeit Süddeutschlands ' Bericht der Römisch-GermanisheKommision, xxxw (1951—53) pp. 77—1 14.
  2 The analyses, together with the conclusions which can be drawn from them, will be published in series entitled Untersuchungen zu den Anfangen der Metallurgie, of which the first volume is at present in the process of being published, under the title of Metallanalysen Kupferzeitlicher Bodenfunde aus Europa, written by Junghans, Sangmeister, and Schroeder (R. G. K., Frankfurt).
the areas with the highest percentage of finds and not merely areas of more intensive research. Such areas with a high proportion of finds would then represent centres of metallurgy, exporting implements to the other areas. Such centres can be worked out for most groups: e.g. the Spanish or the Hungarian-Yugoslav group, etc. A study of these groups, to find out when and by whom they were used, showed that certain groups were in use during the Eneolithic period (E 01, E 00, C 3 a), others during the early Bronze Age, or Reinecke A 1 (C 1, C 2, B 2, A) ,while groups F 2 and F 1 were almost exclusively used during Reinecke A 2, and still other groups were used by Eneolithic cultures which were contemporary with the early Bronze Age in Southern Germany (E 10, C 3 b, E 11, B 1). The general results can be used in a re-examination of certain open questions in prehistory, and in his discussion of these problems Prof. Sangmeister considered the following points :
(1) A new division of the southern and central German hoards on the basis of the associated finds.
(2) An examination and study of the most important grave finds of the south German Bronze Age (e.g. Straubing and Singen) according to their metal types.
(3) The significance of the Scheibenkopfnadel (or disc-headed pin, e.g. Childe, Danube in Prehistory, 1929, p. rx, A 6).
(4) The part played by the Southern German corded-ware cultures in the early Bronze Age.
  The session on the following day opened with a paper on the beginning of the Bronze Age on the Iberian Peninsula, by Miss Blance. She began by describing the Neolithic background to the period, and then the importance of, and the part played by, early centres of metallurgy such as Los Millares, Vila Nova de Säo Pedro and Alcalar. She continued with a short discussion on the sudden rise and expansion of bell beakers, when the use of hammered metal was a characteristic feature (e.g. tanged daggers, Palmela points, etc.) which was followed by the rise of El Argar and other local cultures noted for their rich and varied metal industry, and frequent use of casting. Miss Blance then produced the Spanish part of a catalogue of early Bronze Age metal objects, from Europe and the Near East, which is being made in Freiburg, with the support of the Forschungsgemeinschaft. The significance of the early centres of metallurgy in the Iberian Peninsula, and their probable relations with the East Mediterranean area, was dealt with in discussion, especially by Profs. Sangmeister and Milojöié.
  The session continued with a lecture by Hr Schubert on the Copper and early Bronze Age in the North-West Balkans. He said that he had visited Yugoslavia three times in the past few years, primarily with the aim of collecting metal samples for analysis. He himself was more concerned with the purely archaeological study of the cultures and their relationships. Owing to the fact that finds of the early Bronze Age are not numerous in comparison to the large number of heavy copper implements (mainly shaft-hole axes) his work was chiefly concerned with the latter. From a detailed study of the forms, it was possible to distinguish various types, the distributions of which can be limited to different areas. Mr Schubert believed that these groups were products of different workshops.
  An interesting discussion of the early Bronze Age in Switzerland was given in a paper read by Mr Neuffer. First of all he reviewed the theories of previous workers, especially those of Tschumi and Vogt, and then went on to consider the Swiss Bronze Age finds, and to link them up with the Reinecke system for Southern Germany. This seemed to show that Reinecke A 1 was more strongly represented in S.W. Switzerland than in the north, where metallurgy was perhaps in the hands of the ' Eneolithic ' communities. He ended by saying that he hoped during the summer to visit the more important Swiss museums to take samples for metal analysis. Mr Neuffer's paper aroused much interest and a vigorous discussion followed in which Dr Hundt stressed the importance of the pottery for this period.
  The last lecture of the Conference was on the Scandinavian Bronze Age by Mr Cullberg. He gave a survey of the present state of knowledge of the Neolithic and Bronze Age in Scandinavia, and pointed out that the position in the north was quite different from that in central Europe, and was in fact more like that in Great Britain. One of the chief diffculties was that although the archaeologists were well acquainted with the material of their own country, they often, quite understandably, did not fully appreciate the significance of the outside relationships. The late Neolithic problems especially had been worked out from Megalithic or Bronze Age times when the historical situation on the Continent was quite different. In Mr Cullbergs's opinion team-work was necessary in order to solve these problems and he hoped that the Arbeitsgemeinschaft would be able to provide this.
  Together with archaeological and historical problems, discussed at the end of the lectures, several questions concerning the natural distribution of copper ores and their special compositions arose and were most helpfully dealt with by Drs Hesemann and Otto.
  Dr Junghans, in closing the conference, thanked the guests for coming and for providing such interesting discussions, in the course of which many helpful suggestions had been made for further work on the problems of the Bronze Age.
GIUDI
Nobody who considers the map of Dark Age Scotland can fail to be puzzled by the absence from it of Stirling.l The Castle Rock of Stirling is ideally suited to primitive methods of defence, and its command of the point where the north-going Roman road crossed the Forth must already, in the post-Roman centuries, have given it the strategic importance that it retained until 1746. It also overlooks the head of navigation on the river. On all these grounds some record of a Dark Age Stirling might reasonably have been looked for—to set, for example, beside Din Eidyn, Alclud, Dunpelder, Dunadd, Dunollie, or Brude's munitio in the north—but so far none has been forthcoming. The purpose of this note is to suggest that Bede's urbs Giudi should fill the blank.
  Bede mentions Giudi in the course of a description of the Firths of Forth and Clyde. a Having alluded to the Scots and Picts as gentes transmarinas, he explains that he does so not because they lived outside Britain but because they were remote from the part of it possessed by the Britons, ' duobus sinibus maris interjacentibus, quorum unus ab orientali mari, alter ab occidentali, Brittaniae terras longe lateque inrumpit, quamvis ad se invicem pertingere non possint '. The sentence that bears on the present question then follows, and it reads ' Orientalis [sinus] habet in medio sui urbem Giudi, occidentalis supra se, hoc est ad dexteram sui, habet urbem Alcluith '. This juxtaposition of Giudi and Alclud immediately suggests that Bede had in mind the principal place on each of the two firths, and that he pictured Giudi as a great fortress comparable with Dumbarton Rock.8 And on this showing, as an eastern counterpart of Dumbarton, Stirling comes naturally to mind.
Constrained by Bede's expression in medio sui, Skene identified Giudi with the island of
   1 The earliest reliable record of Stirling dates only from the reign of Alexander I (1107—1124), when it occurs in a charter (Lawrie, Early Scottish Charters prior to A.D. 1153, No, CLXXXII). Too much importance should not be attached to the occurrence of the place-name Struthlinn, under the years 995—7, in the Prophecy of St Berchan (Anderson, Early Sources of Scottish History, 1, p. 519). a Hist. Eccles., 1, c. 12.
   8 Urbs seems to be an accepted term for a fort, as Bede uses it not only of Alclud but also of Bamburgh (Hist. Eccles., 111, cc. 6, 16), and Nennius of a place with a ' cair ' name (Hist. Brit., c. 42).
Inchkeith; 4 but this conclusion, though in formal agreement with Bede, is absurd and need detain no one. Hunter Blair avoids the diffculty by interpreting in medio not as ' in the middle ' but, as he puts it, ' half-way along ', 5 with the tacit assumption that this really means ' half-way along the south shore '. He would accordingly place Giudi ' in some suitable position ', suggesting Inveresk or Cramond. He supports his interpretation of in medio sui by indicating that Bede was concerned to contrast the positions of Giudi and Alclud on their respective firths ; in this he is unquestionably right, as Bede would presumably not have used distinctive wording unless he had had some topographical difference in mind, but at the same time he seems to have missed the real point of the contrast. Bede does not, by any means, think of Alclud as lying, in Hunter Blair's words,  at the head of the Firth of Clyde ', as he states specifically that it is ' on the right-hand side ' (ad dexteram sui) ; and consequently it is just such a position, on one side of the Firth of Forth, that his language rules out in the case of Giudi. Had Giudi been situated, at say, Inveresk or Cramond, no contrast with Alclud would have existed, and the expression ad dexteram sui would have been equally applicable to both.
  A further argument against Inveresk, on Hunter Blair's interpretation of Bede, is that it lies well east of the centre of the south shore of the Firth, if measured from the Bass Rock to the head of small-craft navigation without regard to minor irregularities or to the windings of the contracted waterway above Alloa. Cramond, which lies some eleven miles west of Inveresk, would meet the case much better, but neither Cramond nor Inveresk possesses the natural defensive qualities that would have appealed to Dark Age natives, nor is there any evidence for a practice of rebuilding ruined Roman forts for defensive use.
  The true meaning of in medio sui can perhaps be found if we assume that Bede was not himself familiar with the Firth of Forth but depended on the reports of sailors or other casual informants. If so, he may well have imagined the Firth to be a more or less triangular opening with a wide base to seaward, width as well as depth being stressed by his words  longe lateque ', as it is notoriously diffcult to appreciate coastal features from a ship at sea and ordinary observers on land also tend to smooth out the irregularities of Nature and he might then understandably have used the words in medio sui to mean ' at its apex regarding the apex as a kind of mid-point between evenly converging shores. Stirling, placed as it is at the highest point that a seaman would be likely to reach, would exactly fit this meaning of in medio sui, and no real strain on Latinity would seem to be involved. The use of the phrase would be even more natural if the sinus was thought of as a kind of rounded pocket, with Giudi at its bottom.
  Alternatively, in medio sui might well relate simply to the Castle Rock's appearance as a kind of island, rising abruptly from the middle of the Forth carse-lands. Its aspect would impress any stranger approaching from the east by the river or from the south by the Roman road; and the same idea, of an island set in the middle of flats and backwaters, is apt to be suggested by the view from the summit of the Rock, with the wide meanders of the river flanking its base.
  Two possible objections to the theory must now be considered. The first might be based on the possibility 11 of connecting Evidensca, in the Ravenna Cosmography, with
 4 Celtic Scotland, 1, p. 71.
  5 The Origins of Northumbria, p. 37; An Introduction to Anglo-Saxon England, p. 41, n. His argument is contained in the first of these two passages.
  6 This is, for example, the invariable practice of unlettered persons exploring in the woods in Canada. Their plans show rivers running in straight stretches with tributaries entering at right angles, while lakes are neat circles or ovals.
 Nennius' ludeu 8 and so with Bede's Giudi. Professor Richmond informs me that Evidensca must, on the evidence of the Cosmography, have been on the ' Roman ' side of the Antonine Wall, and consequently it cannot have been Stirling; but equally it cannot have been Giudi if the argument (supra) about the meaning of in medio sui is to be accepted. Nor, for that matter, is the equation of Evidensca with ludeu more than an attractive hypothesis. 9 The second objection would draw upon Nennius' account of the battle of Campus Gai,10 and maintain that, wherever this battle was actually fought, it was unlikely to have been near Stirling—with the further implication that urbs ludeu cannot have been that place. However, the possession of Stirling might well have been affected by the political results of a battle fought elsewhere, and even as far away as Leeds while at the same time it would be natural for Oswiu to take a lively interest in Stirling seeing that he could hardly have undertaken serious campaigns in Pictland, such as are implied by Bede's record of his successes against the Picts and Scots,12 unless he controlled the vital Forth crossing. 13
  In conclusion, I wish to thank Professors K. H. Jackson and I. A. Richmond, Dr K. A. Steer and Mr R. W. Feachem for valuable help and suggestions.
ANGUS GRAHAM
8 Hist. Brit., cc. 64, 65.
Archaeologia, loc. cit.
   10 Loc. cit. This extremely obscure passage is discussed by Lot, Nennius et I'Historia Brittonum, pp. 76 f. and 205, nn. I, 2. See also Stenton, Anglo-Saxon England, pp. 83 f.
Stenton, loc. cit.; Bede, Hist. Eccles., 111, c. 24. Kist. Eccles., Ill, c. 24.
   13 It is interesting to note that Lot thinks of ludeu as ' le poste avancé de la Northumbrie contre les Pictes de rextréme Nord et les Bretons de la vallée de la Clyde ' (op. cit., p. 77, n.
KUML AND SKALK
The Jutland Archaeological Society was founded in March 1951 and now numbers well over 1,500 members from Denmark and abroad. The Journal of the Society, called Kuml, appears annually, and its articles have summaries in English and German. The 1956 volume with the dramatic photograph of the hand of Grauballe man on the cover is already famous, and contains not only a full description of the Grauballe find with the publication of Tauber's C.14 date for it of A.D. 310 ± 100 years, but also articles by Prof. Glob, Harald Andersen, and Peder Mortensen on the work of the Danish Archaeological Bahrain Expedition. The Jutland Archaeological Society publishes, in addition to the Journal, larger works at irregular intervals, of which three have so far been published, namely P. V. Glob, Ard og Plov i Nordens Oldtid (40 Danish kroner), M. B. Mackeprang, De nordiske Guldbrakteater (60 Danish kroner), and O. Klindt-Jensen, Bronzekedelen fra Brå (30 Danish kroner: see ANTIQUITY, 1955, 137). The subscription to the Society is 12 Danish kroner annually, while persons and institutions wishing to give special support to the Society may take out prepresentation-membership for 100 kroner yearly. The address is Jysk Arkaeologisk Selskab, Vester Alle, Aarhus, Denmark. Also from Aarhus, comes Skalk, a small attractively produced quarterly magazine of popular archaeology edited with vigour and characteristic humour by Harald Andersen, assisted by Georg Kunwald, Olfert Voss and Mogens Orsnes. Skalk started in 1957 and we wish it all luck; it is certainly one of the most original and amusing attempts at popularizing archaeology—and is extremely good value for the money : four issues for 4 Danish kroner. Skalk is published at the Forhistorisk Museum, Vester alle, Aarhus.
     1 Petrie, Prehistoric Egypt Corpus, C 70M and D 47G. Both pots are in the Petrie Collection at University College, London.
2 Ancient Egypt, 1933, pp. 1—14 and 65—75, and Figs. 47—52.
3 ANTIQUITY xxxll, pl. xxla.
4 Frankfort, Cylinder Seals, pl. Vie; Contenau, Manuel d'Archéologie orientale IV, Figs. 1084 and 1086.
5 Annales de Service, LIV (1957), pp. 239—240.
6 Nav Light on the Most Ancient East (1952 ed.), Fig. 40 (not Fig. 51, to which Dr Barnett refers).
     7 Two similar but smaller pots were found by E. C. Lanning at Mubende. They are unpublished, but are deposited in the Uganda Museum, nos. 5328 and 5329.
Listed by E. C. Lanning, Uganda Journal, 17 (1953), pp. 51—62.
8 Didymus, P.G., 39-720A; Socrates, P.C., 67.650A; Sozomen, P.G., 67.1362C; Theodoret, P.G., 83-419C.
P.G., 42.337C.
Dyggve, op. cit., p. 26.
9 cp. Ambrose, Ep., 20, 44. 8 Mystag., i, 2.
     10 Obviously the small fonts used for baptism by affusion are irrelevant, since they had no interior steps; these, however, would seem to have formed the majority of those in use; P. Lernerle states he knows of no font deep enough for baptism by immersion in the whole of Greece (Philippes et la Macédoine orientale, 1945, PP. 337 f.).
11 Archaeologia, XCIII (1949), p. 34.
---------------
  
------------------------------------------------------------
  
  ---------------
  
  ------------------------------------------------------------
  
ANTIQUITY
  
NOTES AND NEWS
  
50
  
50
  

  
50
  
ANTIQUITY
  
NOTES AND NEWS
  
50
  
50
  
ANTIQUITY
  

  
