REVIEWS
ANCIENT HIGHWAYS OF THE PARISH OF HALIFAX. By W. B. CRUMP, M.A. Halifax : Halifax Printing Co. Ltd., 1929. pp. 115, 2 illustrations and 2 folding maps. 4s.
    The Author deals with a part of Yorkshire which is off the beaten track, on the slope of the Pennine range and on the fringe of a wild moorland country. The book is not commonplace topography but full of interest to the student of the old trading routes of the 17th and earlier centuries, especially in the historical facts drawn from constables' accounts and other local data. By these happily disposed extracts we can visualize the motley traffc passing along the roads. Valuable too, are the little sidelights thrown upon the evolution of the settlements from early times. Mr Crump has obviously made a close study of the roads and trackways or ' causeys ', and peopled them with the men of the period with the pack-horse trains, the gypsies, the traveller  with a pass and the ' outlandish persons, in fact the flotsam and jetsam of the 17th century. More than a passing acquaintance is shown with the map makers from the 16th century onwards and the author has left no source of knowledge untapped. Very interesting are the payments for the upkeep of roads and Mr Crump is to be congratulated upon his work for the preservation of their historical importance. We note the book is a collected edition of a series of lectures written for the Halifax Antiquarian Society, and we hope that other societies may encourage such endeavour. It is a treatise which can be read with enjoyment by even a complete stranger to the district, so entertaining are the historical references. HUGH P. KENDALL.
STONEHENGE, TODAY AND YESTERDAY. By FRANK STEVENS. London : H.M. Stationery Ojice. Revised edition, 1929. pp. 90, with illustrations and plan. 6d.
    This is a revised edition of the offcial handbook familiar to Stonehenge visitors and both in exposition and in format is a model of its kind. The astronomical theory is stated very fairly ; the Druids are swept back gently into the limbo. The main conclusions from recent investigations are well described though it is a pity it was thought necessary to omit the logical deductions on which they are based since they are such instructive examples of modern archaeological method.
    Mr Stevens still keeps to the attractive guess that the blue stones formerly stood in the Aubrey holes but if the numbers of stones and holes are to correspond as he suggests he will have to revise his figure of fifteen stones in the horseshoe.
    The examples of drinking cups quoted on p. 81 are apt to mislead as to the actual rarity ; the fact that half of the beakers found in Wiltshire, as shown in Mrs Cunnington's list, were near Stonehenge, is important.
    A new sketch plan is added showing the latest discoveries, including the z and Y holes, to which however there is no reference in the text. ERNEST WALLS.
MEISTERWERKE DER TÜRKISCHEN MUSEEN ZU KONSTANTINOPEL :
Band 1. Griechische und römische Skulpturen des Antikenmuseums. By MARTIN SCHEDE. Berlin and Leipzig: Walter de Gruyter and Co., 1928. 50 plates. 180 marks.
    Works upon ancient sculpture appear with gratifying frequency ; too often their price places them beyond the means of most individuals. This costly volume of fifty fine photographic plates—the first of a series—is a welcome contribution from Turkey,
515
