Stonehenge: new contexts ancient and modern
N. James?
Jacques et al. (2010) have begun to report a Mesolithic site about 1.5km east of Stonehenge, just outside the town of Amesbury. Thousands of stone tools and debitage, cooked aurochs´ bone, burnt flint and other signs of domestic life show that it must have been a base camp (Bishop n.d.). Other than isolated artefacts, the only previous evidence for this period hereabouts is the ‘totem pole’ pits near the henge (Allen 1995: 41–47). Jacques’s discoveries suggest a place of Star Carr’s size. The site is Blick Mead, at a spring by the Iron Age hillfort known as Vespasian’s Camp.
  Jacques has also discovered artefacts dated from Neolithic to medieval. The evidence supports the idea of a long tradition of visitors to the district. The post-Mesolithic “hiatus” is no longer so “major” (Allen 1995: 62; Bishop n.d.).
  A sample of the finds was shown in Stonehenge before the stones: local excavations at Vespasian’s Camp, at the Ely Museum last December and January (Ayres 2011). They were in five cases with wall panels, photographs and a short film of the dig. The emphasis was on the Mesolithic blades (Figure 1), burins, microliths and other tools along with cores and some of the bone and burnt flint. Two fragments of Bronze Age metalwork were shown, Late Bronze Age and Iron Age pottery, three small stones dated to the Iron Age and interpreted as sculptures of birds, a Roman loom weight, the fragment of a Saxon brooch, and three later medieval pieces, including part of a wooden stake (presented in a little tub of water). One case complemented the film and photographs by showing technical details of the dig.
  Why was this exhibition in Ely, nearly 200km north-east of Stonehenge? The core of the excavation team is recruited from the Open University, which provides distance learning supported by local tutors and advisers. Teaching in the University’s East of England region, Jacques invited students to volunteer alongside Amesbury residents and a detachment of the Girls’ Brigade. Supported with awards from the Open University and his college at Cambridge, and by the local authorities, English Heritage and a local business, he has brought experienced supervisors from his own region. Over the past seven summers, there have been just 26 days of digging. The budgets for excavation and then the exhibition have been tiny (Jacques et al. 2010: 14). Stonehenge before the stones went to Ely, then, to acknowledge the students and staff and also because the small museum brightly seized its opportunity to mount ‘The world premier’ [sic] for the finds. Fine promotion for the satisfactions (soggy) of excavation, it was about ‘community archaeology’. Stonehenge, after all, is valued all over England.
  Yet plans are afoot for returning the finds to Amesbury. The town council has obtained the land for a museum of local history and, as new housing is put up near by, it expects
?	Division of Archaeology, University of Cambridge, Downing Street, Cambridge CB2 3DZ, UK
C Antiquity Publications Ltd.
ANTIQUITY 86 (2012): 922–923	http://antiquity.ac.uk/ant/086/ant0860922.htm
922
N. James
   to exploit ‘planning gain’ to build stores and galleries. The finds from Blick Mead were displayed at Amesbury over the Easter holiday. A speaker at Ely explained that the aim is to free “Amesbury ... from ... the Stonehenge shadow”—to record, for example, the armies that came from afar to train on the surrounding plain a century ago; but the monument and its landscape would not, of course, be ignored. The finds Figure 1. Mesolithic blades were sharp enough to cut the from Blick Mead are expected to go to the fingers (courtesy of David Jacques; c Andy Rhind Tutt). new museum, and we shall certainly be hearing much more about them.
Acknowledgements
David Barrowclough and David Jacques explained the research and the exhibition to me, and Cllr Fred Westmoreland Amesbury’s museum project. I am grateful to Mr Jacques too showing me Bishop (n.d.) and for
  
his comments on a draft of this note.
References
ALLEN, M. 1995. Before Stonehenge, in R.M.J. Cleal, K.E. Walker & R. Montague, Stonehenge in its landscape: twentieth-century excavations: 41–62. London: English Heritage.
AYRES, K. 2011. Stonehenge before the stones: local excavations at Vespasian’s Camp. Ely: Ely Museum.
BISHOP, B.J. n.d. [2012]. Archaeological trial investigations at Vespasian’s Camp, Wiltshire: preliminary assessment of the lithic material. Unpublished manuscript.
JACQUES, D., T. PHILLIPS & M. CLARKE. 2010. A reassessment of the importance of Vespasian’s Camp in the Stonehenge landscape. Past 66: 14–6.
C Antiquity Publications Ltd.
923
