Notes and News
  
Stonehenge as an eclipse predictor:
In this brief note, Sir Fred Hoyle comments on one of the points made by Dr Gordon Moir in his review of Hoyle's 'On Stonehenge'.
In his review of my book On Stonehenge (Antiquity, Llll, 1979, 124), Dr Gordon Moir has pointed out that the inequalities of the motion of the moon would affect the accuracy of calibration, if one attempted to use the sighting lines at Stonehenge as an eclipse predictor. The issue concerns the nodes of the lunar orbit, and I will discuss it here in relation to a calibration made for the +290 declination position of the moon.
  It is emphasized that the men of 5,000 years ago were not required in my book to have understood the detailed complexity of the moon's motion. They were required only to follow a simple unambiguous procedure which represented the actual situation approximately. The question under discussion is how good such an approximation could have been, and whether it was suffciently accurate to permit satisfactory eclipse predictions.
  The practical procedure is as follows. Set up a sighting line, say 1 0 inside the +290 standstill position. The sighting line consists of a stone or post viewed from a distance of about 200 feet (60m), with the top (1 to 1 •5 feet wide) intersecting the horizon, which could be either natural or artificial. The observer begins a count of half-days (light and dark periods) at the moment when the moon, in approaching the +290 standstill position, is first seen to rise to the north of the stone or post. The count ends when, in receding from the +290 standstill, the moon is first found to lie to the south of the post or stone over a whole monthly cycle. The nodal calibration is then set to correspond with the half-way point of the count.
  I find that this procedure can be inaccurate in its representation of the actual situation for the moon by months at the beginning of the count, and by similar margins at the end of the count. Because the various periodicities which affect the moon's motion are incommensurate with each other, the
a comment
errors at the beginning and end of the count combine randomly. In a worst-case situation where both the beginning and end of the count happen to be 2 months late (or early) the midway point is also 2 months late (or early) and the nodal calibration is then set 3 0 out of its true position. But when such errors combine in an opposing sense, with one of them early and the other late, the half-way point is set accurately, with the errors cancelling to zero. The root-mean-square placing of the half-way point would be rather less than a month, corresponding to a root-mean-square error in the calibration of about 1 •3 0 , much smaller than the 100 involved in the eclipse limits. To obtain this satisfactory mean error, all one need do is to average the half-way points for three or four different sighting lines, such as exist at Stonehenge.
  As well as the inequality mentioned by Dr Moir, the error sources discussed in the Appendices of my book were included in the above estimates. The northern monthly extremum of moonrise does not usually occur at Stonehenge. For the purpose of the present calculation, a uniform 0•15 0 deviation to the south due to this effect was assumed. This is an average for the third term on the right hand side of equation (27), p. 124 of my book. Anyone seeking to rework my calculation will find that the effect of the inequality of the moon's motion is more readily disentangled after this averaging has been done.
  I am grateful to Dr Moir for raising this further question, but I fear I cannot agree with him that it causes a diffculty. In some respects the situation is actually improved. There is some systematic tendency for the different sources of error to cancel, and there is less need for the stones or posts to be thin at their tops, a condition which formerly I found worrying.
  Finally, I would add that a good practical procedure avoids action being taken on negative observations. Instructions such as 'do X if Y is not observed' are all very well in theoretical logic but
  
44
NOTES AND NEWS	45
  
should be avoided in practice. The procedure outlined above has the merit that all its actions follow positive observations. There is also a natural symmetry about the stone or post. At the beginning of the count, with the moon's monthly angle of swing opening up to the north, the relevant observation is to the north of the stone or post. At the end of the count, with the monthly angle of swing receding to the south, the relevant observation is to the south of the stone or post. This northsouth symmetry introduces the width of the top of the stone or post into the calculations, a width of about 1 •5 feet (045m) being found optimum in
China's newest museum: Qin Shi Huang Tireducing errors.	FRED HOYLE
  
China's newest museum opened on 1 October 1979, the 30th anniversary of the proclamation of the People's Republic by Mao Zedong. The timing was politically significant, as the museum's subject Qin Shi Huang Ti, the first Emperor of a united China, has been much praised by Chinese leaders in recent years for his energetic application of the Legalist philosophy, as well as for his military and political achievement in unifying the warring states.
  The museum covers the army of life-sized pottery warriors recently excavated some 2 km east of the great tumulus in which Qin Shi Huang Ti was buried in 210 BC. The tumulus itself, 47m high, is a prominent feature of the landscape of the Wei valley, 5km east of Lin Tong and some 40km east of Xian, the Qin dynasty capital; it has not yet been investigated, although documentary accounts attest to its rich furnishings, so the extent of the looting by the Han only a few years after the Emperor's death remains to be ascertained.
  Survey had already determined that the tumulus was surrounded by a double enclosure, a 'spirit city', the inner 1 sq. km, the outer with a perimeter of c. 6km. The recent discoveries lie 1 •5km beyond the outer enclosure, on the lands of the Yan Zhai People's Commune, and are still in course of excavation by the Shaanxi Provincial Committee for the Preservation of Historical Relics.
  Three large pits have been discovered, formerly roofed with wooden beams and entered by sloping ramps; the largest has been roofed over to form the new museum, while the others just to the north have been emptied and back-filled. Pit No. 1, according to information released by the Chinese authorities at the opening, is 230m in length E—W, 62m in width and 5m deep ; five ramps enter it on the east and west sides and two on the north and south. The wooden roofing had been burned and collapsed, burying and damaging the pottery figures, and the resulting depression had gradually silted up. The total area of Pit No. 1 is estimated at 14,260 sq. m, of which almost 1,000 sq. m, mainly at the eastern end, has so far been completely excavated.
  More than 500 pottery figures of warriors c. 1 •8m high have so far been recovered, together with six chariots each pulled by four horses; the horses are about 2m long and stand 1 •sm high. Each of the human figures has distinctive features, leading to the speculation that living individuals in the imperial guard were portrayed, and that these figures took the place of the mass immolations known from earlier times. The Chinese view is that 'this was conducive to the development of social production, being a progressive practice of the feudal society compared with that of the slave society' (Anon, 1979, from which other information in this note is also extracted).
  The figures are armed with real weapons, including bronze swords, spears, crossbows and pikes. The eastern end of Pit No. 1 has three ranks of figures, 70 individuals in all; the head of each rank is in armour, meticulously modelled in clay, while the other soldiers wear padded robes with sleeves, puttees and laced shoes, again all in clay. They carry bows and arrows, and are bareheaded.
  Behind this first formation are 38 columns of infantry, clad in scale-armour and armed with sword and spear, interspersed with chariots. The excavators interpret the whole layout, which may contain as many as 6,000 figures in toto, as the vanguard, main body and flanking guards of a battle formation, facing east away from the imperial sepulchre to protect it from approaching enemies.
  Pit No. 2, lying 20m north of the east end of Pit No. 1, is L-shaped and covers 6,000 sq. m; in it were found a unit of cavalry, chariots and infantry, nearly 1,000 figures in all, again equipped with real weapons.
  Pit No. 3 covers 500 sq. m; the excavators describe it as U-shaped, but the published plan suggests a broad T-shape with a narrow eastern
