Stonehenge: creating a definitive account
ANDREW J. LAWSON*
The preparation of an archive of all 20th-century excavations at Stonehenge and the re-analysis of these records has been commissioned by English Heritage. This note reviews the development of ideas on the phased construction of the monument and reveals the potential for the publication of a full account of the excavations.
  
It appears that at cach solstice Stonehenge, England's most famous prehistoric monument, becomes the focus of debate over public access, protection and interpretation. In 1992 the debate is poised to become more forceful as English Heritage and the National Trust appeal against the refusal of planning consent to construct better visitor facilities on a new site 1 km from the stones. English Heritage has the unenviable task of balancing the various and frequent claims for direct access to the stones with the need to protect and preserve the ancient monument which is the focus of attention. The National Trust, landowner of the surrounding area with its wealth of archaeological remains both visible and buried, has a similar task, but both bodies are united in the most laudable aim of enhancing the visitor's understanding and enjoyment of the Stonehenge landscape. Theories about the motivation behind the construction of Stonehenge and its enduring or changing role abound. However, what archaeological evidcnce we have about how and when it was built is derived from a large number of excavations conducted throughout the 20th century (FIGURE I). It is known that earlier digging took place, and in sorne instances it may be possible to locate these attempts, but because no detailed contemporary records were made they are of little academic value. Virtually all modern guidebooks and displays which describe the sequence of construction reiterate or plagiarize Richard Atkinson's book, first published in 1956.
  Unrivalled in its usefulness and clarity, this work lacks the detailed presentation of the observations recorded at the time of excavation to support the thesis advanced. In the intervening decades professional archaeology has adopted high standards, and now many of those who wish to reconsider the chronology of Stonehenge hope, perhaps over-optimistically, that a similar standard can be applied retrospectively.
  Atkinson had the benefit of first-hand excavation experience at the site and, hence, had a rare opportunity to reassess the descriptions of earlier workers there. Much of his book is a careful selection of earlier conclusions presented in a logical, understandable and accessible form: such is the skill of many authors of best-selling works, but a skill elusive to most archaeologists. Re-reading earlier publications it is possible to suggest how ideas on the phased construction of the site developed.
  Surveys of the monument had been conducted by Inigo Jones (in 1655), William Stukeley (1723) and John Wood (1740), and doubtless others also, but the most accurate was that of W.M. Flinders Petrie (1877) which claimed to be accurate to within one-tenth of an inch in any direction. This has remained the basis for many subsequently published plans. (It might be argued that this is a better basis for comment on the positions of stones because subsequently the majority of them have been re-positioned during consolidation works.) The numbering of the stones also originates in Flinders Petrie's (1880) publication, although additional stones have been discovered and the current numbering is now somewhat cumbersome. From the survey, Flinders Petrie plotted different centres for the earthen and stone
  
 Trust for Wessex Archaeology, Portway House, South Portway Estate, Old Sarum, Salisbury sp4 6EB, UK.
ANTIQUITY 66 (1992): 93441

FIGURE 1. Stonehenge. A schematic location of dated excavations on the Avenue and its extension. B areas of all recorded 20th-century excavations and trenching (by Hawley) at the monument.
  
circles and proposed four phases of construction, namely circular earthwork, Avenue, sarsen stones and the bluestones which were added at various times. The four peripheral station stones were added 'probably not earlier than the sarsen circle'.
  In 1901 William Gowland excavated in the vicinity of the tallest stone, no. 56, which was leaning at a perilous angle and which, in the interest of public safety, was to be re-erected. His limited excavations were carefully controlled, well recorded and promptly published, a standard which declined with later excavators. He observed that the bluestone (no. 68) set within the horse-shoe of trilithons had been erected in the backfilled construction ramp of the sarsen, thus providing stratigraphic proof of a sequence. On the basis of the artefacts recovered (mainly flint tools), he concluded that Stonehenge belonged 'to an age antecedent to the full development of the use of bronze'. Aided by Lockyer and Penrose's astronomical calculations of the correlation between the monument's axis and the contemporary midsummer sunrise he concluded that the sarsens had been erected at the start of the Bronze Age about 1800 BC. Atkinson could not put forward any evidence to alter this perceptive pronouncement substantially, and only the recent recalibration of radiocarbon dates suggests a slightly older date for the erection of the stones.
  The most ambitious campaign of excavations was that of William Hawley between 1919 and 1926, undertaken at the request of the Ministry of Works and described in annual reports published by the Society of Antiquaries. Hawley's perseverance was stoic. In June 1921 he wrote to Gowland (Society of Antiquaries Library):
I am here all alone and am doing the work myself without labour but shall have a man later for filling in. I do not least mind the loneliness and am perfectly happy with the work and a comfortable little compartment in a hut.
Hawley excavated half the perimeter of the ditch and the Aubrey Holes within. In 1920 he was confident in saying 'the ditch and rampart were made at a time considerably anterior to Stonehenge'. The following year he collected 'a great quantity of small snail shells' from the ditch fill and took these to signify 'a long period off neglect and desuetude when vegetation sprang up unchecked'. A period of abandonment prior to the introduction of the stones was similarly identified from the molluscan evidence in 1978 by John Evans (1984).
  In 1922 and 1923 Hawley's investigation of the entrance demonstrated its remodelling about the monument's realigned axis, additional stoneholes in the entrance area and the addition of the Avenue after these modifications. His excavations also revealed groups of post-holes in the entrance, between the stone circle and bank and within the circle. When Hawley began to investigate the area around the sarsens (nos. 8 & 9) of the outer circle he found that 'the ground was honeycombed' and admitted 'I doubt if anybody will ever be able to explain it satisfactorily'. The previously unknown Y and Z holes were also discovered, but the precise arrangement of his trenches between the circle and bank is not known because no plan survives.
  By the time the work was called to a halt he had stated that 'the innumerable post holes are the earliest structures on the site'. 'The site is older than the monument standing upon it . chips of the stones forming the latter occurring only above the silt [of the ditch] and never in it.' Because Beaker pottery was sometimes 'embedded in the top of the silts', it would place the building of the stone monument about the overlap of the Neolithic and Bronze Ages. Various other conclusions were reached, but in effect the suggestions of Flinders Petrie and the results of Gowland's work were reinforced.
  An independent view of the sequence at Stonehenge was published in 1929 by Robert Newall, who had been responsible for recording in the field much of Hawley's work and had dug his own trenches as Hawley laboured. He pointed out that the Station Stones would need to have pre-dated the sarsen circle whose axis they shared if there was to be intervisibility between them; the Altar Stone would have been upright; the bluestone circle must have been pegged out before the erection of the sarsen trilithon because of its accuracy, yet executed after; and he said that a partner to the Heel Stone 'is to be expected' (a prediction which was confirmed by Pitts in 1979). Thus a firm foundation was laid for Atkinson's account.
  Hawley recognized the Aubrey Holes as an early feature and was in no doubt that they had
  
held uprights. Although he originally thought that they contained stones, the excavations between 1926 and 1928 at Woodhenge led the Cunningtons to conclude: ' judging from the size and shape of the Aubrey Holes it seems not improbable that they once held timber uprights' (1929: 24). But it was uncertainty over the function of the Aubrey Holes and of the Y and Z holes which started the next series of excavations by Atkinson, Piggott and Stone, Piggott's excavations at Cairnpapple Hill reaching the conclusion that the circle of peripheral pits there were not for uprights.
  Although Atkinson was the author of what has become the standard work on Stonehenge, he was at the time the most junior of the team who began an intermittent campaign of excavations between 1950 and 1964. Initially Stuart Piggott, Marcus Stone and Richard Atkinson undertook small-scale excavations in an attempt to resolve specific questions concerning the Aubrey Holes, the Heel Stone and the Y and Z holes. At a later lecture in Devizes, Atkinson made reference to Stuart Piggott as the 'leader' and himself as 'follower'. As the Ministry of Works' need to consolidate the monument emerged larger excavations became necessary. The majority of these were undertaken in advance of the need to place stones in secure (concrete) foundations, and hence may be regarded as rescue recording. The urgency required was amply demonstrated by the collapse of Stone 23 in 1963.
  Atkinson's book was written in 1955 after three seasons of work and was published in 1956. It was written in response to an invitation from the publishing firm Hamish Hamilton following a radio broadcast which described the work of 1953 and Atkinson's discovery of the first of the celebrated carvings. In addition to tho infamous carvings of Stone 53, other carvings were noted on Stones 3, 4, 5, 23, 29, 57 and 12(), and Robert Newall began a detailed study of them (FIGURE 2), although his work was never fully published. More than 35 years after the production of Atkinson's book it is easy to assess its contribution, First, it made available to a very wide audience the sum of current knowledgc on the monument carefully selected from earlier writers. It would be difficult to overstate the importance of this, not least in its clarity of expression. The second was in the use of radiocarbon dating. The first dates confirmed

135 ft
FIGURE 2. Stonehenge: axe carvings on the eastern (outer) face of Stone 4 (based on a drawing by Newall, 15 January 1954).
the approximate age of the monument, but the relative inaccuracy of the dates, the complexity of the constructional sequence and the limited number of determinations to date now limit the value of this analysis. The contribution is reviewed by Pitts (1982). The third contribution was the deduction of the way in which the stone monument had been assembled. Stratigraphic relationships are infrequent: excluding the relationship between the Heel Stone and neighbouring features, and those between the ubiquitous post-holes, the main complexity is in the bluestone settings where, in the northeast quadrant at least, earlier dumb-bell shaped sockets (the Q and R holes) underlie the current circle (see below also). The only relationships between bluestone sockets and those of the sarsens are that Stone 68 is set in the ramp of 56 (as noted by Gowland) and the ramp of Stone 3 cuts an early stone hole (Q4) outside Stone 32. The latter observation was crucial for the relative dating of the earliest bluestone setting. Key to the sequence and Atkinson's innovative contribution is the recognition and disentangling of the various bluestone settings, his mathematical skills being put to good use in considering various combinations and permutations of stones and stone-holes. The full extent of the double bluestone setting (Phase Il) cannot be fully traced because of the limits of excavation. Evidence for its presence on the south-west side is apparently lacking and Atkinson considered it unfinished.
  Although Atkinson said that the evidence of a short-lived resetting of some of the bluestones in an internal ellipse (111b) following the erection of the sarsens (Illa) is 'almost wholly inferential', six stone-holes can be attributed to the structure. Two of these cut the internal ends of the elongated stone-holes which flank the axis of the double bluestone setting (Phase Il). A further, but more complex stratigraphical sequence was revealed in 1956 when an area on the west side of the monument between Stones 58 and 59 was excavated. Here the stump of bluestone 70A belonging to the final (Illc) setting was discovered, supported on a stone plinth, itself placed within an earlier, infilled stone-hole with a stone impression on its base. The inference is that the earlier hole was for a bluestone of Phase 111b. However, this cutting shows greater complexity because the Phase 111b stonehole cuts an even earlier curving trench with stone impressions at its base.
  The 1979 edition of Stonehenge includes the statement, 'Excavations now provide some slight and tantalising evidence that the double circle of bluestones enclosed an inner setting' although much of the central area has not been excavated this century. The record of the 1956 cutting prepared by Richard Atkinson (FIGURE 3) provides part of the evidence for this inner structure. Apparently the curving trench contained no chips of foreign stone and hence, once again, it can only be inferred that the stone impressions were those of bluestones. Further evidence for internal structures was revealed in 1964 in small (2 ft square) cuttings in front of Stones 53 and 54, at a depth of over seven feet. These cuttings were required by the engineers engaged in straightening the adjacent trilithon.
  Newall had argued that the Y and Z holes post-dated the collapse of Sarsen Stone 8, and the presence of later prehistoric pottery in their fills might argue that they represent one of the last phases of activity on the site. Newall's archival notebooks (Alexander Keiller Museum, Avebury) contain contemporary excavation drawings 'showing Z9 cut into the incline of No. 29 stone' and Z7 cutting the 'incline to Stone 7'. Nonetheless, Atkinson maintains (pers. comm.) that through probing he had located the apparently missing Z8. Therefore, the long intervals between the erection and collapse of Stone 8, and the subsequent cutting of the Y and Z holes, assumed by Newall, may not have occurred. Furthermore, the cutting of the construction ramps of the sarsen circle (Illa) by the Z holes, which Atkinson attributes to 111b, would be used by him to support the idea that the latter were dug to take the bluestones not used in the internal ellipse of that phase.
  Although it may appear to some that Atkinson's scheme was predicated on the belief that the number of stones could not be altered additional stones could not be commissioned or others removed (or fragmented) — it was the striking similarity in the number of stones used in the different phases that compelled him to pursue the observation rather than dismiss it as coincidence.
  What appears crucial in the phasing of the archaeological features is the time at which the bluestones were worked. The final setting re-uses architectural fragments (an observation made much earlier by Herbert Stone). Either these came from a different site and were 'secondhand' or they were from a different setting within the monument. At a relatively late date in the sequence bluestones were either heavily worked -or broken up, as witness the ubiquitous fragments. When this took place and where the fragments occur in 'the fills of negative features may be crucial to the unravell-
  
	STONEHENGE CUTTING I l l	1956S E C T I ON
RE CON -
STRUCT EDFIGURE 3. Stonehenge: plan and section of excavation in 1956 prepared by Richard Atkinson.
  
ing of events. At the moment, the statements from different excavators seem inconsistent.
  A superficial view of the recorded evidence within the excavated areas reveals a palimpsest of features of different sizes and depths (e.g. FIGURE 3). It may be that a number of different interpretations are possible, or Hawley may have been correct that it will be impossible to explain. Atkinson's 1956 account was a 'veritable tour de force of applied logic' (Pitts 1982: 126) and presented an elegant model for an elegant monument. His sophisticated interpretation reflects the architectural sophistication of the structure and he wrote with first-hand experience of the site. Unfortunately, any subsequent analysis will not have the benefit of the excavator's eyes. Marcus Stone died in 1957. In 1978 Atkinson said graciously of Piggott 'You have most generously allowed me . . to act as spokesman' (Devizes Museum transcript), but having adopted this role his career and latter ill-health have prevented him from bringing the excavations to a fuller publication as he would wish. Many projects initiated in the 1950s, '60s and '70s had little provision for post-excavation analysis. Having learnt the hard way, professional expectations have altered and strategies are advocated to take full account of the burden that excavation places on their managers and to ensure that planning, resources and contingency underpin admirable intention (English Heritage 1991).
Verge
		PALISADEUnderpassVATCHER 1967FIGURE 4. Stonehenge: location of archaeological recording and identified features in the car park and underpass.  A number of other investigations contribute to our knowledge of Stonehenge. Atkinson's final excavation was in 1978, when the position of the socket for Station Stone 94 was confirmed. At the same time John Evans recorded a Beaker-style burial in the ditch and assessed the changing environment of the monument. His brief mention (three lines) of the counterscarp bank provides the only archaeological description of the internal structure of the remnant of this rather ignored element of the monument. Between 1979 and 1980 Mike Pitts recorded both the predicted partner to the Heel Stone and the complex deposits in that area, which include early stoneworking debris. Both of these interventions are well published. Various excavations have been conducted on the Avenue and its extension to West Amesbury (FIGURE IA) and other, apparently unrelated features within the vicinity have been recorded. In the car park and current visitor centre area is a series of large pits attributable through radiocarbon dating and environmental evidence to a mesolithic episode, while the underpass crosses a buried palisade and accompanying bank thought to be of later Bronze Age date (FIGURE 4). The record of all these known features merits clear presentation.
  Atkinson's ambition of seeing the full publication of 20th-century excavations at Stonehenge may still be realized. English Heritage has recognized this as an academic imperative and wish to see the successful conclusion not reached during the life of its predecessor, the Inspectorate of Ancient Monuments. Although work to this end is already under way, the desire to improve the facilities at the site has added urgency to the need to present the 'facts'. The interpretations of the monument required for a new visitor centre must be based on the best evidence available. Consequently, the Trust for Wessex Archaeology has been commissioned by them to create a site archive which will contain as much primary excavation evidence as can be found. Professor Atkinson has already contributed all his records and site photographs. A consistent and integrated record will be created, then analysis will begin. It is hoped that the end product will present the archaeological evidence to support Professor Atkinson's account, or, if appropriate, to suggest alternative views. Although a clear structural sequence may not emerge, a priority must be to present the evidence clearly so as to end speculation and to provide the raw material for those who wish to advance their own ideas.
Acknowledgements. I am most grateful to Professor R.J.C. Atkinson for his valuable contribution to this paper, and to Professor Stuart Piggott, Brian Davison (HBMC) and Dr Julie Gardiner (WA) for their comments on the draft. The illustrations were prepared by Julian Cross, Rob Read and John Vallender (at various times for WA).
References
ATKINSON, R.J.C. 1956. Stonehenge. London: Hamish Hamilton. (Revised and reprinted 1979. Harmondsworth: Penguin).
CUNNINGTON, M.E. 1929. Woodhenge. Devizes: George Simpson.
ENGLISH HERITAGE. 1991. Management of Archaeological Projects. 2nd edition. London: Historic Buildings and Monuments Commission for England.
EVANS, J.C. 1984. Stonehenge — the environment in the Late Neolithic and Early Bronze Age and a Beaker-Age burial, Wiltshire Archaeological and Natural History Magazine 78 (1983): 7—30
FLINDERS PETRIE, W.M. 1880. Stonehenge: plans, description and theories. London: Edward Standford.
NEWALL, R.S. 1929. Stonehenge, Antiquity 3: 75—88. PITTS, M. W. 1982. On the road to Stonehenge: report on the investigations beside the A344 in 1968, 1979 and 1980, Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society 48: 75-132.
  

Tombs and monumentality in southern Madagascar: preliminary results of the central Androy survey
MIKE PARKER PEARSON*
This note reports the initial results of a joint multidisciplinary project between the University of Sheffield and the Musée d'Art et d'Archéologie in Antananarivo, which has concentrated on the investigation of the social and economic significance of the tombs that are an outstanding landscape feature in an area of southern Madagascar.
One of the islands of the world whose island, 1000 miles long and 300 miles wide, archaeology has been largely ignored by has in fact been subject to archaeological
English-speakers is Madagascar. This large research particularly from the 1960s, notably
 Department of Archaeology & Prehistory, University of Sheffield, Sheffield SIO 2TN, UK.
ANTIQUITY 66 (1992): 941—8
934	NOTES
  

  
934	NOTES
  
934	NOTES
  
	NOTES	937
  
	NOTES	937
  
