The Symbols carved on Stonehenge
by O. G. S. CRAWFORD
  AST summer an archaeologist, Mr R. J. C. Atkinson, taking photographs at Stonehenge, made a most remarkable discovery. He was preparing to photograph  a namel carved on the inward-facing (northwest) face of Stone 53, one of the Great Horseshoe Trilithons ; for this purpose he had remained there after 5 0'clock on July 10th, waiting for the sun to move round and shine on it. Looking not directly at the stone itself but at the image on the glass of his reflex camera, he suddenly saw the dark outline of what appeared to be a dagger, and beside it that of an axe. The carvings were deeply cut and the edges smoothened by the erosive action of more than thirty centuries of British weather (PLATE 1). Closer inspection revealed several more axes and some other markings, all probably artificial but now too much weathered for decipherment. Two days later a ten-year-old schoolboy, David Booth, found an axe on the outer face of Stone 4, one of the stones of the Outer Circle, and subsequent search revealed ten more axes on the same face (PLATES 11, VI A). Later still, while engaged in making casts of the axes already discovered, Mr R. S. Newall has found many more, bringing the total for Stone 53 up to 12 and for Stone 4 to 25, including on the latter one exceptionally large axe measuring 14 inches in length and inches across the splayed cutting edge. He has also verified three axes like the others near the bottom left-hand corner of the outer face of Stone 3 (PLATE 111 B) 1 ,
    When visiting Stonehenge on 27 August last Mr Brian Hope-Taylor found yet another carving, this time on the side of Stone 53. It seems not to be an axe but a dagger ; though very faint a shallow groove can distinctly be seen representing the hilt and expanding slightly at the top into a round pommel. At the butt are two horizontal projections. The total length from top to bottom is about 5} inches, and the width across the middle ( = the butt) inches, the hilt and pommel together measure about 21 inches. Though described here as a dagger it must be stated that this attribution is a little uncertain ; it might also be interpreted as a conventionalized representation of a human figurine, but to find exactly comparable examples of this type of figurine would not be easy and one would have to go far afield : there are certainly none in Brittany. Mr Newall, when making a cast, observed that the hammer-marks made when incising the carving were the same as those made when dressing the stone, so that it looks as if
     IOH : LVD : DEFERRE, i.e. John Louis Deferre, of whom nothing is known. Mr Atkinson quite properly included some of these recent but not wholly uninteresting carvings in his photographic survey, which is part of the general survey of the monument being carried out by Professor Stuart Piggott, Dr J, F. S. Stone and himself. Mr Atkinson was using a Kine Exacta (35 mm, reflex).
both were done at the same time and before the stone was erected. There would however be no diffculty in making the carving after erection, as I verified on the spot. The carving is 3 feet 4 inches from the ground, 1 foot inches from the next stone, No. 54, and
1 foot 6 inches from the inner edge of the stone. This may seem to give little working

70 feet
20 merres
FIG. I. PLAN OF STONEHENGE, SHOWING STONES (SOLID BLACK) ON WHICH CARVINGS HAVE BEEN FOUND UP TO THE PRESENT TIME
room, but there is in fact enough, for the space between the stones widens out in the direction of the centre of Stonehenge.
    These carvings are all by incision. There are others in the opposite technique whereby the surrounding surface has been chipped or bashed away leaving a raised rib. The first recognition of this technique at Stonehenge was Professor Bersu's in 1932 ; at the meeting there of the International Congress of Archaeology he saw and photographed a raised rib on the outer face of Stone 53. It so happened that I was staying with Professor Bersu at Frankfurt just after the first discovery of carvings last July was reported in the Times, and he produced his 1932 photograph. We did not then know any details and wondered whether this rib might not perhaps be involved, though, of course, as we found out later, it was not. He had called the attention of at least one of those present to the carving, but the discovery was not followed up. Actually this rib cannot yet be explained ; it ends 6 feet above the surface of the ground, the lower part (if such existed) having apparently been lost by flaking of the stone ; what remains is a raised vertical rib, 26 inches long and 4 wide, which is certainly artificial. Mr Atkinson suggests that it may have a functional origin, being what was left undressed between two areas marked out for dressing.
    Of outstanding importance is another carving in the same technique discovered last summer by Mr R. S. Newall on the fallen Stone 57 (PLATES IV, v). It consists of an irregular quadrilateral 3 feet 9 inches in length (or, originally, in height), with a protuberance in what was doubtless meant to be the middle of the top side. This figure is published here for the first time, and I have to thank Mr Newall for allowing me to include it in this article, and Dr Stone for his photograph of Mr Newall's rubbing. The design occurs several times on the megalithic burial-chambers of Brittany, and an illus. tration of them will be given in the next article. Hitherto it has been found in Brittany only, and this example from Stonehenge is the first to be found outside Brittany. The name given to it by Péquart (bouclier-écusson, shield-escutcheon) being unsatisfactory I propose to call it the Box Symbol. It seems in Brittany to have had greater significance or more magic than the other symbols. I shall deal with it and its variant with a pointed top in my next article.
    To complete the catalogue of carvings one must mention Stone 66, now covered up and a rounded stump only, but formerly one of the uprights of the Bluestone Horseshoe. On it is a marked ridge raised 11 inches. No explanation of this ridge has been put forward ; Mr Newall who uncovered the stone and found it, pointed out that the fellow stone No. 68 has a groove 1} inches deep and nearly the same width. 3
    These were all the carvings at Stonehenge that were known up to the end of 1953, excluding of course the mortices and tenons and the many marks of dressing, whose functional purpose is apparent and certain. It now remains to describe the nonfunctional carvings themselves in more detail,
    The dagger (PLATE 1) is carved point downwards, and with its hilt and pommel is 12 inches long ; the base of the blade is 4 inches wide. The ' depth of the carving is now some -t of an inch, but at least of an inch of the surface of the stone has been eroded by weatheringv The base expands outwards on each side in what is described as a short ' horn ', and it is on the strength of these ' horns ' that Mr Atkinson confident]y regards it as the representation of a Mycenaean dagger of the same type as those from Shaft Grave 6 at Mycenae, dated c. 1600—1500 B.C. He would date the carving not later, say, than 1470 B.C. ', and he says that it ' affords presumptive evidence that the designer (indeed the architect) of the monument [Stonehenge] was himself a Mycenaean '. These are large claims to make on the strength of a single weathered carving. The horizontal projection is quite obvious, but the upward tilt claimed is much less so ; if what was originally carved had been a weapon with the very marked upward

3 Ant. Journ. XXXII, 1952, 65—7, Plate 21.
4 Atkinson in P.P.S. XVIII, where other quotations will be found.
    
' horns ' characteristic of certain Mycenaean daggers, subsequent weathering would surely have accentuated the upward tilt and it would now be so marked as to be beyond dispute ; in fact it is not so, and it is disputed. Even if we grant the Mycenaean character of the dagger, why does it follow that it was carved by the designer or architect ? Did he also carve the axes? If so, why did he carve axes of British or Irish type, not double axes ?
    In a round barrow near Badbury Rings in Dorset was a cairn of stones surrounded by a wall of blocks of the local heathstone (a ferruginous tertiary sandstone) on one of which were carved two daggers and two triangles, the latter perhaps representing flat bronze axes. In describing the daggers Professor Piggott suggested that they were represented in their sheaths, and that the ' secondary projections echoing the pommel outline ' were the mouths of the sheaths23. That explanation is equally applicable to the Stonehenge dagger (Stone 53), and to me seems preferable to the Mycenaean one ; and if it be objected that daggers are not usually represented sheathed I would cite the famous Spanish grave-slabs from Solana de Cabanas (Cageres) I am not, however, convinced that this ' sheath ' hypothesis is really necessary.
    Mr Newall has pointed out that the dagger on Stone 53 looks, on his silver cast, as if it had begun as an axe and been converted later into a dagger by having the hilt and pommel added at the top, and the point at the bottom, for it will be seen that the lower inch or two looks like a later addition. There is a similar ambiguity about HopeTaylor's carving on the side.
    Future intensive study may reveal more, but at present there are certainly two types of axe represented, both of metal. The first is that on Stone 53 to thc right of the dagger ; the blade is crescentic and about times the width of the butt. Its proportions and outline closely resemble those of an ornamented and flanged bronze axe (PLATE 111 A) acquired last year by Salisbury Museum and found near Stonehenge 4. The axes on Stone 3 are also of this broad-butted type, which is of course very well known and is characteristic of what used to be called the second or Arreton phase of the Early Bronze Age, and of Piggott's Wessex Culture.
    It has been said in connection with these carvings that one cannot know the material of which the objects themselves were made. That may be logically correct, but the implied criticism is in fact irrelevant. Enough is now known about the prehistory of southern England for us to be able to state that the carvings of the axes with crescentic blades can only represent metal (presumably bronze) axes of a type that has often been found in Wessex, both casually (like PLATE 111 A) and in contemporary burials.
    The second type is represented on Stone 4 by at least two axes whose sides are not parallel but converge to a sharp point at the butt end (PLATE VI A) ; these two ' are executed in a different technique, being outlined by a deep narrow groove (of which only traces now remain) within which the surface has been uniformly lowered to a present depth of about of an inch ' (Atkinson). The polished stone axes of the Morbihan megaliths are all of this pointed butt type, but these two at Stonehenge have crescentic blades which show that the models were of metal. In Brittany, however, the usual type of flat metal axe is that with parallel sides and a broad butt ; and Professor Giot informs me that metal axes with pointed butts are unknown there.
    To the right of the axe on PLATE 1, separated from it by a thin diagonal line of natural origin, are ' several ill-defined depressions, almost certainly the remains of shallower incuse carvings, now unfortunately too weathered for mofe than purely speculative identification ' (Atkinson). There are others, some of them certainly remains of axes, elsewhere on the same surface.
The foregoing paragraphs were written during the last few days of 1953, just after
Mr Atkinson's note had been published. Besides this I had only the photographs which I took of Stone 53 on 27 August last, one only of which (PLATE 1) is reproduced here. I did not then concern myself with the other stones on which carvings had been found for several reasons, chiefly that I wished to wait until details had been published by the discoverers. This having now been done, on New Year's Day, 1954, I went over again to Stonehenge, arriving soon after 10 and taking photographs till 2.30. All those here reproduced except PLATES 1, 111 A and v were taken on this occasion ; it was a perfect day for the job, being windless and the sky cloudless, and the low sun lit up the carvings beautifully. I went first to look at Stones 3 and 4 ; the axes were visible on both stones, but it was probable that the lighting of Stone 3 would be better in about 40 minutes' time, and on Stone 4 about an hour later, so I walked about looking at those other stones on which the light was shining at the right angle. On the south side of Stone 23, one of the Outer Circle of trilithons, I saw—and immediately photographed—the very clear outline of a small knife (PLATE Vll A). The image is defined by a grooved line, and the part within the line does not seem to have been chipped away, as in the case of the axes. The pommel is squat and oval in shape, sitting close on the butt end without any appearance of a hilt. (The same absence of hilt is seen on the Badbury daggers or knives). We know of course that riveted and tanged knives did not have hilts. The blade ends in a sharp point and is very short in proportion to the width of the butt. It can easily be matched by bronze knives from barrow-burials, and is a native type. The outline is slightly asymmetrical. There is a resemblance to the Badbury carvings, but the pommels of these have rather flatter tops.
   When I returned to Stone 3 the three axes found by Mr Barrett, one of the custodians (at the bottom left-hand corner of the outer face) were showing up well (PLATE 111 B). One of them is at the top left-hand corner of the PLATE ; in the middle is another axe with the same splayed crescentic cutting-edge but with a shorter and broader butt. The third, barely visible on the PLATE, is above it.
    At 11 0'clock the carvings on Stone 4 next to it came to life (PLATES 11, VI A). This is the stone whose flashlight photograph is reproduced as Atkinson's PLATE 26.
covered with carvings, no less than 25 axes having already been found on it. To extract all it has to tell us will take a long time and many photographs in different lights and from various angles ; the one most needed now is when the sun shines on it (if it ever does) from the right, which would be early on a summer morning. We are, I think, only at the beginning, and I foresee a long series of notes and articles on the carvings of Stone 4.
    The two plainest—and they are perhaps the plainest carvings yet found—are two axes with pointed butts in the upper middle part of PLATE 11, of which a closer view is given on PLATE VI A. Between them on PLATE VI A is a small axe with a wide butt and a very crescentic blade. Below them is a wavy line, and much lower down on the left is another with sharper zigzag bends. A similar zigzag occurs on the fallen stone, No. 9 B (PLATE VI B). Those on Stone 4 at least seem to me to be artificial. Do they represent snakes ? On the Breton megaliths there are many such wavy lines which have been and are regarded by the local archaeologists as snakes. There is no apriori objection to this interpretation (which would surely have delighted Stukeley), for snakes were certainly associated with the Archaic Religion in Crete, Cyprus, Syria and Palestine. On the other hand, it is certain that some very similar wavy lines in Spain must be otherwise interpreted (e.g. as legs). My next article will deal with this cult more fully, and with what I have called (in anticipation) the Archaic Religion, of which these carved signs here and elsewhere, are a manifestation.
    It will be noted that there are many small cup-marks visible on Stone 9 B ; these may be artificial, but as natural cupmarks are also found on natural sarsens elsewhere in Wiltshire I hesitate for the present to claim them as artificial.
    Stone 3 went dead soon after 11.10, and Stone 4 was at its best soon afterwards. At midday Mr Newall's Box Symbol on Stone 57 began to be visible. Being carved on the top of a fallen stone which has been walked upon by countless visitors, the outline is much fainter than it must have been formerly. For this reason it is very diffcult to photograph ; the outline casts no shadow and is visible only when one looks at it directly against the sun.
    As I shall have more to say in my next article about these Breton Box Symbols, I shall say no more now except that it may represent a highly conventionalized figure, of which the model was in stone, clay or some other substance, of a god or goddess. This interpretation is of course speculative ; it is easier to demonstrate that the kindred Cone Symbol originated thus. The outline of the Stonehenge example is unfortunately broken by flaws and holes in the stone; it is, however, plain enough on three sides (as the photographs on PLATE IV show) to be accepted as authentic without any shadow of doubt. The knob or protuberance on the top side would alone prove this ; I tried hard to take a photograph that would show it, but without success. It is in fact just visible on PLATE IV, but only when you know where to look.
    The Box Symbol went dead for a little over an hour after midday, while the shadow of the top of Stone 16 passed over it, and while I was waiting for it to come to life again I wandered about looking for more carvings. On the south side of Stone 29, in the Outer Circle of Trilithons, I suddenly saw a very clearly outlined image which from its shape (and without any implications) I have called the Torso (PLATE Vll B). The image is waisted and looks rather like a narrow A-Beaker. The top is a slightly curved line 8 inches long ; inches below it is a clearly defined horizontal groove just above the ' waist ' the ' hips ' are 6 inches across. The total vertical length is 16 inches ; and the lower end is 5 feet 3 inches above the present surface. The figure ends on a short straight horizontal line, not a point ; it does not therefore seem to be a dagger, and it is in any case much too big for that. I would point out that the decorated Iberian plaques 8, some of which have two eyes, are all divided by a horizontal line into two unequal parts, the upper (as here) being the smaller ; though they are not waisted, the closely related figurines are 9.
    On the fallen Stone 120 are certain rectangular lines (not illustrated here) which must be artificial, though their significance is not apparent. Mr Atkinson regards them


Illustrated in ANTIQUITY xxvll, 140, fig. 2, no. 31 (Farisoa, Portugal).
      9 On Leisner's Reguengos, Plate 62, compare the waisted figurine no. 3 with the plaque no. 18. For the rock-carving of a stylized human head on a sort of peg, associated with carvings of metal knives, see MacWhite, Estudios, etc., 1951, Plate 33 (near Santiago de Compostela).
as functional and akin to ' Bersu's rib '. On the inner face of Stone 30 and on the south side of the fallen Stone 55 A I thought I could detect markings, but whether natural or artificial I could not decide.
    For what purpose were these things carved on the stones ? Beyond the obvious religious intention nothing is certain. To call them a sort of votive offerings, though probably correct, does not really explain them. One wants to know just on what sort of occasion they were carved and by what sort of persons ; were they local people, or traders or voyagers from afar ? The Box Symbol is a firm link with Brittany which should make Professor Piggott pause before revising his theory of the origins of the Wessex Culture. But the Box Symbol is surely in a different category from that of the axes and daggers ? If one may, without giving offence, make a comparison with modern religions practice, it would correspond with the frescoes on the walls of the church, whereas the axes and daggers are rather to be compared with the candles and the cards left as thank-offerings or with invocations of saints. No doubt the axes and daggers were the attributes or symbols of particular divinities.
    Everyone will be asking how it comes that these carvings have remained undiscovered for so long? There are several possible explanations. In the first place sarsen stones do have, in their natural state, many curious marks which are of natural origin ; for precisely this reason observers have been rather shy of all marks on sarsens. Then again the things represented are not such as would be recognized by anyone but a specialist. There have been many specialists, however, at Stonehenge from the time of Stukeley and Colt Hoare onwards, and the latter certainly was familiar with the shapes of axes and daggers, for he had dug them up in barrows and published engravings of them in his Ancient Wiltshire (1812—19). Rut when specialists go there they usually do so for a specific purpose to which they confine their attention. The carvings are only visible at certain times, and then only when the sun is shining; and they are visible only for a short period— perhaps for not more than two hours at the most; though this certainly does not mean that they were intentionally so placed as to catch the sun at any particular time of day. The human eye tends not to see what it is not looking for or not expecting to see ; and the converse is also true. Mr Atkinson and his collaborators have been working at Stonehenge in previous years, but it was not until the former had his attention fixed, and camera focused, on CARVINGS (albeit of much later date) that he saw the dagger and axe ; he was thinking about carvings, so he saw carvings! We others must all admit our blindness and acknowledge a deep debt of gratitude to those who have opened our eyes at last to a new and fascinating world of images.
         1 Atkinson in Proc. Preh. Soc., N.S. XVIII, 1952 (Dec. 1953), 236. The discoveries were first reported in the Times, July 16, 1953, and then in Nature, No. 307. They were described at a meeting of the Prehistoric Society at Salisbury on Sept. 11th, of the Arch. Institute in London on Jan. 27th, 1954, and of the Soc. of Antiquaries of London on Feb. 4th. The photographs here reproduced were taken by the author except where otherwise stated.
2 Ant. Journ. XIX, 1939, 294, Plate 59.
          3 MacWhite, Estudios, etc., 1951, Plate 24 ; one of the slabs also has a herzsprung shield and is of course much later in date (8th century ?).
          4 Numbered 33/53, described on pp. 12—13 of the Annual Report of the Museum for 1952—3. I have to thank Mr H. de S. Shortt for the loan of the block, Plate 111 A, and permission to reproduce it. The axe was found ' just below the topsoil about 500 yards ESE. of Stonehenge and 400 yards N. of the round barrow, Amesbury 16 '. See also Wilts. Arch, Mag. LV, 1953, 30.
---------------
    
------------------------------------------------------------
    
    ---------------
    
    ------------------------------------------------------------
    
ANTIQUITY
    
THE SYMBOLS CARVED ON STONEHENGE
    

    
25
    

    
25
    
ANTIQUITY
    
THE SYMBOLS CARVED ON STONEHENGE
    

    
25
    
ANTIQUITY
    
25
    
