ANTIQUITY

artifacts was found a number of fragmentary animal bones, two specimens of which have been identified by Dr K. Joysey of the Department of Zoology, Cambridge University, as reindeer. Radiocarbon analysis of two samples of bone from the Creswellian horizon was undertaken by Mr R. Burleigh of the British Museum Research Laboratory and yielded the following results: *
BM-439	9850±115 years BP (C. 7900 BC)
BM-440(a) 9940±115 years BP (c. 7990 BC)
  A fragment of reindeer antler, not found in direct association with the Creswellian material but most probably from the same level, was also submitted for analysis and gave the result:
BM-440(b) 9750±110 years BP (c. 7800 BC)
  All of the above determinations were based purely on the protein (collagen) fraction of the bone samples, and the close agreement between the dates obtained is evidently impressive. It may be recalled that the only other C14 dates so far available for a Creswellian site—those from Mother Grundy's Parlour, Creswell Crags—are between 1,000 and 3,000 years younger than those obtained for the Anston site (Godwin and Willis, 1962). The new dates would seem to provide a clear indication that the earlier stages of the Creswellian go back at least to the very beginning of the post-glacial era.
PAUL A. MELLARS
  * I am grateful to the British Museum Radiocarbon Screening Committee for permission to publish these determinations. All the dates are calculated on the basis of the conventional half-life for carbon-14 of 5570 years.
BOHMERS, A. 1957. Statistics and Graphs in the Study of Flint Assemblages, Palaeohistoria, v, 7—25.
Two Incised Chalk Plaques near Stonehenge Bottom PLATES xLVla-bGODWIN, H. and E. H. WILLIS. 1962. Cambridge University Natural Radiocarbon Measurements: v, Radiocarbon, 4, 57—70.

During the work of widening and lowering the A303 road between King Barrow Wood, Stonehenge Bottom, a small pit was exposed in the chalk of the verge on the north side of the road 193•25 m. west of the wood (NGR SU 13124206).
  A section of the pit had already been removed by mechanical excavator when it was found, but about two-thirds remained. It measured 1 •07 to 1 •22 m. in diameter and 0•61 m. deep, oval in shape. The upper part of the filling, which was very compacted, was sterile, but the lower half in which the filling was quite different contained many objects, Part of an antler pick rested on the top of this layer, near a small scapula, probably that of a sheep. Many sherds of Rinyo-Clacton pottery, and various animal bones, were found throughout the layer, and the two incised chalk plaques 5 and 10 cm. from the base of the pit. Also in this layer were a number of small chalk lumps marked with grooves of varied thickness.
  The upper part of the pit would appear to have been filled soon after the deposition of the lower layer, as the sides were not weathered, but there was no evidence that it had contained a post.
  The chalk plaques had been carefully squared off, and marks of scraping are detectable. The smaller plaque is cm. square, with an average thickness of 1 •3 cm. , and the larger one is to 7•25 cm. square and cm. thick. The pattern on the smaller consists of a lozenge design between two rows of chevrons, with a double border at the edges on all four sides, which itself contains a triple-lined chevron motif (PL. XLV1a). On the reverse side, there are parallel shallow channels which may be part of the preparation of the chalk block.
  On the larger plaque the design is altogether more complex, consisting of an opposing 'Greek key' or stepped pattern on two halves of the same face, one half of the pattern being larger than the other (PL. XLV1b). Pricked dots or hachuring between the double lines of the design help to define and accentuate certain parts. On the reverse side there are two finely incised lozenges, with other lines.
  While there appear to be no close parallels to these two extremely interesting objects,

310
NOTES AND NEWS

broad comparisons may be drawn with the clay plaques from Vila Nova de Sao Pedro (Do Pago, 1941, 43—59), and slightly less so with the schist plaques from other Iberian sites (Leisner, 1951, 114—38); but in no case is there a close similarity of design, or even possibly of purpose, since whatever requirement necessitated the boring of holes at the corners, as in so many of the Iberian examples, that requirement evidently did not exist here. In Britain, one can quote the schist plaques from Ronaldsway, which are oval but which have a lozenge type of decoration, and the stone from Graig Lwyd with vaguely incised chevrons and triangles (Piggott, 1954, figs. 46, 61); also, for lozenge design, the scratched decoration at Skara Brae (Childe, 1931, pls. Llll, Lll, 2; LIV).
  For parallels to the main decoration on the larger plaque it appears to be a vain search, and it poses many questions; but with both the Wiltshire plaques the most striking fact must surely be the sophistication of the designs and the care and purpose with which the work was carried out. FAITH DE M. VATCHER
CHILDE, V. G. 1931. Skara Brae.
DO PAGO, A. 1941. 'Placas de barro de Vila Nova de Sao Pedro', Com. 1 0 Cong. Mund. Port (Lisbon).
LEISNER, G. and v. 1951. Antas do Concello de Reguengos de Monsarez (Lisbon).
A Copper Mineral Pendant from Northern Iraq	PLATE XLVICPIGGOTT, s. 1954. Neolithic Cultures of the British Isles.

Several years ago, some prominence was given in the news to the finds of copper by the combined University of Chicago—University of Istanbul arachaeological expeditions at qayönü near Ergani, in south-eastern Anatolia (Schmeck, 1964 ; Wehrwein, 1964 ; Smith, 1965). Professors Robert Braidwood and Halet Cambel, who had disclosed the finds in a news release, mentioned that I had made a similar discovery of a copper artifact at Shanidar in northern Iraq. This was found by our Columbia University expedition in 1960 (Solecki, 1963). Since there will be some lapse in time before the report on that season, the fourth, is published, it is felt that some additional information on the specimen in question would be of use to researchers in the field of early copper studies (PL. XLVIC). Braidwood (1967) has included some mention of the copper discoveries at Cayönü in the latest edition of Prehistoric Men. I had originally thought that this find (Field Cat. no. 293 IV: Iraq Museum registered expedition no. 305) was intrusive, since strangely no mention was made of it in the daily excavation record. However, the finds at Cayönü, plus the fact of additional evidence for strong confirmatory association at Shanidar, prompted me to accept the Shanidar copper mineral artifact as belonging to the horizon in which it was found. This level, which we call the ProtoNeolithic horizon, is dated at about 10,650 years BP (Solecki and Rubin, 1958). It is approximately the same age as the nearby open village site of Zawi Chemi Shanidar (Rose L. Solecki, 1964), where domesticated sheep have been identified (Perkins, 1964).
  The specimen is a flat, lenticular shaped, double-perforated pendant or bead. It is cm. long and cm. wide (maximum). It has a thickness of cm. , and is flat on both faces. In cross-section, it is trapezoidal, formed by a bevel around its perimeter. A hole was perforated at each end of the long axis through the bevelled edge. The holes, which appeared to have been made from the ventral side, are about 0•25 cm. in diameter. It seems likely that the holes were perforated first, and then the edge bevelled. The holes are situated slightly off centre of the long axis line. One of the holes had been broken through. This was possibly done in the bevelling process. The other hole has a thin wall at the bevelled edge. The basal or dorsal perimeter edge is rather sharp compared to the ventral perimeter at the bevel, which is dulled or rounded. The specimen is bright green, with a kind of scaly coating.
  From a visual examination it looked as though it had been ground and smoothed into shape, rather than beaten. It was examined with a hand lens by Dr Gerald Brophy, of the Department of Geology, Amherst College, who recalls in a letter dated 8th April, 1968, that he believed

311
