facit?g P. 37
The Uffngton White Horse
by STUART PIGGOTT
    HE White Horses cut in the turf of the Wessex Downs are familiar to most people who have wandered over the hills of western England, and many have no doubt paused to look at one or another of them and perhaps to ' hazard a wide solution as to its antiquity or origin. But of the fifteen White Horses in Wiltshire and the adjoining counties, only one can be attributed to a date before the eighteenth century. This, the sire of them all, is cut on the north slope of the Berkshire Downs, above the village of Uffngton, and gives its name to the fertile plain of mid-Berkshire—the Vale of the White Horse. Camden in writing of the Vale was wholly contemptuous of the Horse, saying that the inhabitants named the district ' I wotte not from what shape of a white horse, imagined to appeare in a whitish chalky hill '. But despite Camden's scepticism, the Uffngton White Horse very definitely exists, and has been cited as a landmark since the eleventh century, when the cartulary of Abingdon abbey records that one Godfric was possessed of Sparsholt juxta locum qui vulgQ mons Albi Equi nuncupatur, In the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries the Horse is several times mentioned in connexion with the tenure of lands near it. Mr T. H. Ravenhill has recently drawn attention to an early fourteenth century manuscript in the library of Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, entitled Tractatus de mirabilibus Britanniae, in which the White Horse is given second place among the Marvels, Stonehenge being first. l
    Apart from these references, the Horse suffered neglect until 1738, when Dr Francis Wise wrote his Letter to Dr Mead concerning some Antiquities in Berkshire. In this he advanced the theory which for long held the field (although unsupported by any archaeological evidence), that the Horse was cut in the turf as a memorial of Alfred's great victory of Ashdown in 871. His pamphlet was answered in 1740 by ' Philalethes Rusticus ' in an effusion with the delightful

1 T. H. Ravenhill, The Rollright Stones. Little Rollright, 1926.
37
title of The Impertinence and Imposture of Modern Antiquaries Display'd. An anonymous reply to this in 1741 made no contribution to the subject, and, with the exception of a note by W. H. Thoms in Archaeologia, XXXI, the matter was left in quiescence until the publication in 1858 of Thomas Hughes' famous Scouring of the White Horse, in which the Saxon origin of the Horse was again set out. About 1890 Rev. W. C. Plenderleath published his most valuable little book on The White Horses of the West of England, from which much of the preceding information is derived. In this book he put forward arguments for an Early Iron Age date for the Horse. Finally, in 1926, Sir Flinders Petrie published for the first time an accurate plan of the Horse in The Hill Figures of England, for which all students must be immensely grateful. 2 Certain points in his description cannot however pass altogether unchallenged, and it is the purpose of this present paper critically to re-examine the details of the style of workmanship of the Horse, its associations and its parallels, with a view to determine its date, the culture to which it belonged and the reasons for its making.
    The Horse is constructed by clearing down to the solid chalk over the whole area of body, legs and head, and not by digging a trench to show a white outline only. In this respect it differs from the other turf-figures of the Wilmington Long Man and the Cerne Abbas Giant, but compares with the Bledlow and Whiteleaf Crosses. As it is cut on the slope of the hill, the chalk has been exposed more as a terrace than as a wide ditch ; there being a drop down into the area on the uphill side only. Some parts are banked up, notably the end of the tail and of one hind leg, while the eye is a levelled platform on the slope. The left-hand ' jaw ' runs as a chalky trench on top of a raised causeway about a foot high at its lower end, to make the line more level. At several points, especially along the body and neck, there is clear evidence that the bare chalk areas have been originally wider, as shown by the hollows of the turf. The total length of the Horse is some 360 feet, its maximum height 130 feet.
    It is obvious that a relatively short period of neglect would ensure the disappearance of the Horse beneath encroaching weeds and turf, as was almost the case with the Wilmington Long Man, and has probably been the case with many similar turf-figures now vanished. But the local inhabitants have until recent times ' scoured ' the Horse and cleaned the bared chalk area at irregular intervals, the occasion

The plan of the Horse (fig. 1) is based on that on plate VI of The Hill Figures.
38
    

    
being one of great festivities and a fair held on the hilltop—a festival which no doubt represents an ancient ritual in connexion with the Horse. There are records of scourings from 1755 onwards, until the last in 1857 so vividly described by Thomas Hughes. Now, with the decline of local interest, it has been left for the Offce of Works to take charge of the Horse under the Ancient Monuments Act ; festivities will be left to the Inspector of Monuments and weedkiller replaces Wombwell's Menagerie on the hill.
    The Horse is on a steeply sloping hillside at a height of 500 feet, the slope facing westnorthwest. To the south, on the top of the hill, is the hill-fort known as Uffngton Castle, consisting of an irregular oval area defended by a strong bank and ditch, with a slight counterscarp bank. The western side is flattened and contains the single incurved entrance.
    Between the Horse and the Castle, on the slope of the hill, is an oval mound, 77 by 40 feet, with its long axis northeast—southwest. It is from two feet six inches to three feet high, and has a central crater from excavation. A ditch remains on the south and west. This ' pillow-mound ' would appear to be that opened by Martin Atkins in 1857, and which was found to contain forty-six Roman burials .1
    Below the Horse, on the sides of the 'declivity called by the country folk the Manger ', but nowhere on the steepest slope, are slight lynchet banks implying cultivation of the slopes for no very long period, since on a slope such as this a lynchet accumulates rapidly. One bank shown on Sir Flinders Petrie's plan of the earthworks around the Horse just below the 600-foot level may be an accidental or natural terracing. It is very slight and not quite similar to the other banks.
    On a projecting spur to the north is a natural hillock known as Dragon's Hill, which has been trimmed and flattened on top. Some soil has also been added to the south side. Martin Atkins found Roman coins and pottery on or about it, but it is clearly almost entirely natural, and may have been adapted as a medieval castle mound.
    The Uffngton Horse differs from all the other White Horses in its extraordinary and striking conventionalized style, so unlike modern conceptions of the animal. When considering the date of any artifact, although many criteria may be employed, the two most important are associations and style of workmanship. The former can only
THE UFFINGTON WHITE HORSE
be used in exceptional conditions—for instance, in an undisturbed grave-group a pot of novel form may be dated by an axe of known type, or a ditch cutting through a barrow would be later than the barrow. The White Horse has however no such inter-relation with objects of known date, and while the proximity of sites of a certain period may be suggestive when backed by other evidence, they cannot be used as arguments for date by themselves. We are left then with stylistic grounds alone for suggesting a date for the Horse. It is a piece of work designed in a distinctive and conventionalized form, and we know it was in existence in early medieval times—beyond this there is no direct evidence.
    The main features of the Horse are its attenuated and disjointed shape and in fact its general lack of resemblance to the animal after which it is named. Its peculiar shape has led certain speculative writers to suggest that it is no horse, but a dragon (or even an ichthyosaurus !), the adjacent Dragon's Hill being called in as witness. Dragon's Hill, as we shall see later, may owe its name to another legend, but meanwhile these writers have not considered one strong proof of the animal's equine ancestry, in that an animal so unlike ordinary representations of a horse should have been called the White Horse since the eleventh century. Had there been no firmly rooted tradition that this strange figure represented a horse, it is quite probable that it might have been named by the local people after anything it suggested to their imagination. And when, seeking for parallels, we find undoubted horses represented in an analogous style at a certain period of prehistoric art in England, we can at once dismiss the dragon theory.
    As well as the disjointed and elongated form of its limbs and body, the head of the Horse is of peculiar shape. The ears are large, and the v formed between them cuts deeply into the back of the head. The eye is represented by a round patch of chalk about five feet across, while the greater part of the face is untouched turf bordered by a chalk trench, giving an 'outline' effect unlike the 'solid' treatment of the rest of the body. But the most striking feature of the head is the jaws, which project downwards as two narrow divergent cuttings, not unlike the beak of a bird.
    A horse with just such attenuated body, disjointed limbs and peculiar head is represented on a large and well-known series of gold and silver coins minted in England towards the end of the Early Iron
Age (La 	111) in imitation of a gold stater of Philip of Macedon
41
(died 336 B.C.); the type passing from Gaul to Britain about 100 B.C.* On the reverse of the original coin is a chariot drawn by two horses, urged on by a charioteer, with the name in the exergue. By a process of continual copying from copies the chariot degenerates on the British examples to a wheel (which in itself was probably a sacred symbol among the Gauls), the charioteer to a group of pellets and the horse (in the latest stages) to a jumble of dumb-bells and crescents. In the intermediate examples we have an animal in all essentials like the White Horse, although the body (probably to suit the exigencies of a circular design) is more curved. But to say that the horse on the coins ' is always a short, tubby beast', as Sir Flinders Petrie has stated, is incorrect, and in any case the resemblance between it and the Uffngton figure is still further borne out by the characteristic details of the treatment of the head described above. On a coin showing a very degenerate beast (fig. 2) the narrow beak-like jaws are clearly shown, joined by a cross-bar (? a bit) and the treatment of the body, with its detached limbs, is quite comparable with the Uffngton Horse. Another coin, (fig. 3), more naturalistic as to the body, shows the head treated in outline with a large space around the eye, and is nearer in type to the Aylesford horses.
    The coins are not our sole evidence however for Early Iron Age representations of the horse. On the two famous bronze-mounted buckets from Marlborough and Aylesford (figs. 4, 6, 7) the horse is again represented as a decorative motif, and although the resemblance between these animals and the White Horse is not so striking as that between it and those on the coins, they are all nevertheless recognizable as products of the same artistic tradition.
    Art in England at the close of the Early Iron Age was essentially decorative and non-representational. In its sense of the balance of abstract designs and its triumphant use of curves of faultless certainty and matchless beauty it is probably unequalled. Whether the decoration is on a wooden tub or a cooking pot from Glastonbury, or on such a tour de force of metal work as the Battersea shield or the Birdlip mirror, the even flow of the curved elements of the design and their combination into a harmonious whole show an exquisite feeling for pattern, and a complete accord between the decoration and the object decorated. The artist of the period saw in the horse a symbol to be incorporated in a design, and took what liberties he thought fit to make it in accordance

* First pointed out by Sir John Evans, Coins of Ancient Britons, 1864, p. 21 ff.
42
PLATE 11

FIG. 4. THE MARLBOROUGH BUCKET, DEVIZES MUSEUM
By permission of the Wilts A ychacol,ogical .Socicty

FIG. 5• ROMANO-BRITISH BRONZE HORSE FROM SILCHESTER, READING MUSEUM facing p. 42
    

FIG. 6. HORSES ON THE MARLBOROUGH BUCKET
By permission of the VVilts Archaeological Society

FIG. 7, HORSES ON THE AYLESFORD BUCKET, BRITISH MUSEUM
THE UFFINGTON WHITE HORSE
with his decorative curves. Consequently the opposed beasts on the Aylesford bucket have bodies based upon the s-shaped thick-ended scroll which forms the basis of design in another panel on the same vessel, while their tails are bifid and doubly curved. The heads have the jaws curved outwards and thickened, and the ears are thickened s-curves, but the large eye remains and in its essentials it is the same head as that at Uffngton and on the coins.
    The horses on the Marlborough bucket (which are directly comparable in style to some from La itself) are also conventionalized, although their jaws have been converted into a single spiral appendage not unlike a grotesque trunk. The bodies are elongated and s-shaped, and the mane is a prominent feature.
    This conventionalization of animal forms can be paralleled in medieval heraldry. The heraldic lion is a monster unlike anything that ever lived, and indeed with his elongated body and stylized legs he is by no means unlike the White Horse. But he fills a space admirably ; he can be arranged to fit a pattern and is a satisfying piece of decoration. So with the Early Iron Age horses. In both cases design was the all important factor in the artist's mind. Landseer might paint more leonine lions than a medieval herald, or Morland more equine horses than the Aylesford beasts, but perhaps they could neither of them have made so good a pattern.
    It has often been remarked that the native British tradition in art survived in certain products of the Roman occupation of this island, notably in the Castor ware and in some enamelled brooches. The hunting scenes on the pots of Castor ware are quite in the tradition of the coins, and when we look at the well-known cup from Colchester with a chariot race upon it, we see the coin conventions repeated again—a wheel to represent the chariot, and the horses, although not so disjointed as on some coins, yet still executed in the British manner.
    A small bronze figure of a horse from Silchester (fig. 5) must certainly be the work of a British craftsman who might almost have had the White Horse in mind, so alike are they in general conception. The Silchester figure is more naturalistic as to the head, but the eye is shown by a primitive ' ring and dot', and the treatment of the body and legs is completely non-Roman in feeling. Although improved by breeding in a more sophisticated stud, it still shows clear traces of the old stock.
    On stylistic grounds then we may date the White Horse as not earlier than La 111 . It is unlikely that a work on such a scale
ANTIQUITY
would be constructed during the Roman occupation, so we may suggest a date within the first century B.C.
    One feels that there ought to be some relationship between the Horse and the hill-fort above it, and Mr Crawford has suggested that it was the tribal emblem of the inhabitants of the camp .4 Mr C. F. C. Hawkes tells me that there is evidence to show that Uffngton Castle was constructed in Hallstatt-La 1 times, but surface finds near include two small enamels of typical late La style.
    A feature of the construction of Uffngton Castle, namely the existence of a facing of sarsens to its chalk ramparts , suggests comparison with Alfred's Castle near by, a small earthwork with similarly constructed ramparts. Surface finds of pottery from the latter site suggest a Hallstatt-La 1 earthwork occupied again in La Téne 111, and Uffngton Castle may have had a similar history.
    A horse as a motif of decoration on a coin is understandable, but one naturally asks why any people should cut out a horse more than a hundred yards long on the side of a conspicuous hill. While freely admitting that there may be a tendency to ascribe anything unusual to religious purposes, (especially when little is known of the religion in question), it seems hard to suggest any other origin for the Uffngton Horse. Mr Crawford has suggested that it was a totem, and such a conspicuous figure must have been a cult-object for a large area. What we do know of Gaulish and Celtic deities indicates the existence of a considerable element of animal worship, and in England especially of the cult of the boar—the horned man Cernunnos, the swine-god Moccus and the bull-god Tarvos Trigaranus are further examples. The goddess Epona appears to have been a minor deity represented as riding on a horse, and it has been suggested that the original Epona was a divine mare, the woman being a later sophistication' While not going so far as to identify the Ufhngton Horse with Epona her existence as a deity is a pointer in the right direction.
    Local legends and folklore often convey a useful hint to the archaeologist, and although the Horse itself appears to have no legends about it (other than those of its association with Alfred, doubtless dating from the eighteenth century), local tradition asserts that Dragon's Hill is so called because St. George killed the Dragon on its summit,

4 ANTIQUITY, 1929, 111, 281.
6 Rice Holmes, Ancient Britain, p. 284 n.5, quoting de Jubainville.
THE UFFINGTON WHITE HORSE
and further that no grass will grow where the blood was spilt. This association of a spot so near the Horse with St. George is of peculiar interest and importance. There is evidence that that popular saint replaced, on the introduction of Christianity, a deity or demigod who was either closely associated with horses or actually a horse-god. This substitution of a Christian saint for a pagan god is of course by no means uncommon, and as the early missionaries to England had definite instructions to reconsecrate the pagan shrines to Christianity, 2it is only to be expected that many a local deity would be replaced by an appropriate and convenient saint, or indeed might become a saint himself. The innumerable holy wells in the West of England and in Wales point to converted water-gods who exchanged their ancient and dubious habits for a halo and a ready-made and edifying history. At one of these wells, the well of St. George at Llan San Sior, near Abergele, North Wales, horses were sacrificed until quite recent times. The custom was for the rich of the district to offer one horse, and then all diseased horses were brought to the well and sprinkled with the water, while an appropriate blessing was pronounced. 3 The fine springs just below the Manger and Dragon's Hill may have been similarly associated with the name of St. George.
    The legend of Dragon's Hill may thus preserve a valuable link between the White Horse and this shadowy deity which the popular St. George legends suggest.
    In English folklore there are abundant traces of rites centreing round animal gods : for example, the ritual sacrifice of a man disguised as a ram was enacted in a crude drama in Derbyshire until a few years ago, 4 while the man masquerading as a horned beast has a distinguished history which may begin with the palaeolithic sorcerer and end with such odds and ends of customs as the horned mask of Christmas mummers in Dorset. The ancient horse-god may now caper about as the Cornish and Somerset hobby-horse of the May-day festivities and the Hooden Horse of Thanet, or be degraded to the Christmastide buffoonery of the South Wales Mari Lwyd. 5 In Derbyshire ' The
ANTIQUITY
Old Horse ' was the chief actor in a drama in which he was rejuvenated, while in Yorkshire a similarly disguised person went round at Christmas singing a song.
    Whether the St. George who is killed and resurrected in the well-known Christmas mummers' plays should be connected with the horse-god can only at present be suggested with all reserve, but the Mari Lwyd (the South Wales equivalent of the Mummers) and the Derbyshire play are suspicious if nothing more.
    These survivals, slight as they are, may serve to show that a horse-deity has left traces in existing folklore, and it is most probable that the seasonal 'scouring ' with its attendant festivities on the hill must represent an ancient ceremony, as the maypole dancing above the Cerne Abbas Giant. I have elsewhere 6 suggested links between this figure and certain medieval legends and modern folklore elements.
    But any connexions of the Horse with ancient cults or modern folklore must at the best be tentative guesses, and from study of the available facts we can only safely draw one conclusion ; that the Horse is a monument constructed at the end of the Early Iron Age, probably in the first century B.C. Beyond this we can be sure of nothing, and in many respects the White Horse still remains a mystery.
1 Wessexfrom the Air,	19.
          2 See for instance the letter from Pope Gregory to the Abbot Mellitus, A.D. 601, quoted by Bede. (Bohn's edition, pp. 55—6).
          3 T. Gwyn Jones, Welsh Folklore and Folk Custom, (Methuen, 1930), p. 112, quoting Pennant's Tours (late 18th c.)
4 Derbyshire Arch. and Nat. Hist. soc. XXIX, 31-42.
5 See Guide to Welsh Bygones. Nat. Mus. Wales, pp. 62—4.
6 Folk-Lore, XL, 193—95.
---------------
    
------------------------------------------------------------
    
    ---------------
    
    ------------------------------------------------------------
    

    
ANTIQUITY
    

    

    

    

    

    

    

    

    

    

    

    
ANTIQUITY
    

    

    
ANTIQUITY
    

    

    

    
44
    
44
    

    

    
