ANTIQUITY, LVII, 1983	PLATES XXII & XXIII
What future for Stonehenge?
CHRISTOPHER CHIPPINDALE
For years the squalid state of Stonehenge, Europe 's premier prehistoric monument, has been a disgrace. Its improvement will require the urgent attention of the new commission which will take over the care of ancient monuments within the next year. Here Christopher Chippindale explains how the present mess came about, reminds us of some earlier perils Stonehenge has survived and summarizes some recent ideas as to what should be done. Mr Chippindale, now a research student in the Department of
Archaeology, University of Cambridge, has been working for some time on the recent history of Stonehenge.
  
Like many researchers since, William Stukeley in the mid-eighteenth century wondered why the site of Stonehenge had been selected for the Britons' most sublime temple. It was chosen, he decided, according to the ancient notion of placing temples 'in clean and distinct areas, distant from profane buildings and traffc' (Stukeley, 1740, 11) (Pl. XX11a). Two hundred years on, Stonehenge is set about with traffc, busy main roads running past on both north and south sides, and profane buildings have appeared—the Larkhill military complex on the northern skyline, and the Stonehenge car-park and visitors' facilities close by on the north-west.
  For several centuries now, Stonehenge has been among the most visited of British ancient monu-

ments. Records of tourist day-trips from Salisbury via Old Sarum (still a favourite outing) go back more than 400 years (Folkerzheimer, 1562), and Stukeley (1740, 5) talked of its 'infinite number of daily visitants'. Their numbers have certainly become many times greater since. Accordingly Stonehenge has, over the last century and a half, seen a series of measures to ensure its physical survival and to cope with the press of sightseers in the busy summer months. In 1978 these culminated in the closure of the central area among the stones, so that it was no longer possible for the visitor to see Stonehenge properly, a move which understandably caused dismay (e.g. Dyer, 1978).
  Stonehenge, of course, is far from being the only British site in danger of destruction from enthusiastic visitors. Hadrian's Wall has been battered for decades. Other sites on the Wessex chalklands, like West Kennet, are suffering, and Silbury Hill is now also closed. But Stonehenge is the worst single case, where the disease has been chronic for more than 100 years and has threatened at times to overwhelm the patient. Five stages in the development of the illness can be identified. The first two, under private ownership, are :
1 a long period of minimal supervision (to 1901), and then
2 a policy of private restrictions (1901—18).
After the gift of Stonehenge to the nation, and its control by successive government departments beginning with the Offce of Works and now the Department of the Environment (DOE), there have been three further stages :
3 an effort to return to ruralpeace (1918—34), which proving unworkable gave way to
4 an attempt at accommodating the numbers (1935— 75). In the end, this has been overwhelmed also, giving rise to 5 a crisis (1976— which continues.
1. Minimal supervision (to 1901)
172In medieval times, Stonehenge was known, but it barely figures in the extensive land-records of Amesbury parish, in which it stands (Pugh, 1947). Neither a source of profit nor a boundary marker, it was simply a worthless curiosity. Occasionally, a stone may have been removed to make a bridge or when builders needed an especially hefty block. Certainly, some smaller bluestones and at least one larger stone (presumably a sarsen) disappeared in the seventeenth century (Jones & Webb, 1655, 42 : Aubrey, 1685).
  Thereafter, few if any complete stones were removed. Instead, visitors attacked the stones with hammers to hack off souvenir chips. Initially, they were encouraged by the lingering superstition that the stones had magical healing properties, and later, by learned attention to the petrology of Stonehenge. On a busy day right up to the 1870s 'a constant chipping of stone broke the solitude of the place' ('Vacation Rambler', 1871). R. S. Newall's story (Atkinson, 1960, 191) of a hammer kept at Amesbury expressly to be hired out to Stonehenge visitors has no foundation that I have been able to find, but there is ample evidence for many a private hammer at work (Chippindale, 1983a, Ch. 10).
  In the seventeenth century, Stonehenge must usually have been deserted, except during the annual fair held there, though a shepherd might materialize to hold the horses and cadge a few pennies (e.g. Pepys, 1668). About this time, nevertheless, a flint layer was laid between the stones, presumably a deliberate, artificial surface to reinforce the most-traffcked areas (Atkinson, 1979, 213). And by 1740, even before the passion for Druids, the picturesque and tourism took hold, there was suffcient trade for 'Gaffer' Hunt, an ancient Amesbury carpenter, to set himself up as guide-cum-liquor-seller with a lean-to hut and a cellar dug under a sarsen (Wood, 1747, 32, 34). The fall of a trilithon in 1797 was said to result from gipsies digging a shelter by it (Browne, 1833, 18).
  In 1824, the Amesbury estate, and with it Stonehenge, was bought by the Antrobus family, who took an active interest in its upkeep. Henry Browne, a self-styled lecturer in ancient history and disciple of Buckland's diluvial geology, was soon installed as the first of a series of Stonehenge guardians. He was unpaid, but entitled to earn a living as a guide and by selling souvenirs in return for ensuring no damage was done. The physical evidence of nineteenth-century carvings visible on the stones confirms contemporary records that the guardians were ineffective, but Sir Edmund Antrobus, third Baronet, stoutly resisted all pressures on him to safeguard better the 'Frontispiece to British History'. He was the proprietor of Stonehenge, and no one was to tell him what to do with it (Chippindale, 1983b). General Pitt-Rivers, trying to negotiate its protection under the 1882 Ancient Monuments Act, made characteristically vigorous plans—to restore inclining stones to the perpendicular, to supply foundations of concrete or masonry, and to install a resident policeman (Pitt-Rivers, 1893). Sir Edmund would have none of this, or of any other lunatic suggestions for iron fences or encircling moats (Antrobus, 1894). He did what he thought fit, instructing his gamekeeper to evict the Stonehenge rabbits and his architect to prop any stones that seemed in danger.
  The Antrobus policy did permit much surface damage to continue, but his resistance to several attempts at large-scale restoration and/or excavation was fortunate. If contemporary expert advice had been followed, the archaeology of Stonehenge would have been quarried away wholesale. The other side of the landowner's absolute right was shown by the attitude of the fourth Baronet: he encouraged the rumour that Stonehenge might, if the government would not find {125,000 to purchase it, go to the highest bidder, most likely some American who would ship it overseas (Le Gallienne, 1900, 185—6; Chippindale, 1978, 113). No law seemed to exist that would have prevented such a fate.
  Stonehenge on a Victorian public holiday was a busy place: 'The pilgrim who goes there with his reverent mind full of Druids . . . undergoes a series of electric shocks. .. . He never bargained for vanloads of uproarious humanity, dressed in all the colours of the rainbow, and in many others of aniline origin. They come, they crack jokes, they feast, and they sing the latest sweet things from the music-hall repertoire . . . while a fusillade of gingerbeer adds to the general rudeness' (Chippindale, 1983a, Ch. 10). Busiest of all in the last decade of the nineteenth century was the night before the summer solstice, when watching the sun rise (supposedly directly behind the Heel Stone) became the fashion. It was neither a sober nor a reverent affair. The crowds would spend a long evening fortifying themselves for the vigil in the Amesbury pubs, and walk, up to 3,000 strong, along the dusty roads to Stonehenge, where the sun usually declined to rise visibly to the occasion (Harper, 1899, 209—10).
2. Private restrictions (1901—18)
The persistent fears for the safety of Stonehenge were shown to have some basis when, on 31 December 1900, an upright of the sarsen circle fell inwards, bringing a lintel down with it. At last Sir Edmund took effective action, both to control access and to prevent further stone-falls. Stonehenge had until then stood on the open downland, with a scatter of tracks running to it. Now a wire fence was put up, a shilling admission fee charged, and a policeman installed to prevent misbehaviour. Opposition was intense, both locally since a wellestablished habit of access had been abruptly cut off, and nationally. The National Trust, the Footpaths and Commons Preservation Society and other amenity groups saw it as arbitrary interference by an arrogant squire in the public's rights to something that should have belonged to the nation. The protestors sued in the High Court and lost, with justice as they were in effect arguing for the continuation of the pre-enclosure free-for-all (Chippindale, 1978).
  For archaeological advice Sir Edmund consulted an expert committee (from which John Lubbock, Lord Avebury, resigned because it was 'not suffciently insistent on the rights of access of the public' (Hutchinson, 1914, 136—7)). No restoration was attempted, and the only stone thought to be in danger was stone 56, the surviving upright of the great trilithon, whose angle of lean was large and increasing. This was pulled upright in autumn 1901, and its base set in concrete. The small area round its base was excavated to the very best standards by William Gowland of the Royal School of Mines, South Kensington, whom the the Society of Antiquaries nominated as supervising archaeologist (Gowland, 1902).
  The restricted admission gives the first clue to actual numbers of visitors, 3,770 paying for entrance between May and October 1901. This figure seems very low, and contrasts sharply with the accounts, so numerous and strongly worded, of large and rude crowds for many years before.
  These measures suffced for the time. Stonehenge itself was now closed to vehicles and to horses (it is easy nowadays to forget that motorcars, for all their unloveliness, at least do not drop steaming excretions where they are parked) ; visitors were prevented from lighting fires or obviously interfering with the stones. The wire fence was visually inoffensive, though it did break the open landscape; an earlier suggestion had been for a sunken ditch or ha-ha which probably would have given no visual intrusion at all (Wilts. Arch. Soc., 1886).
3 Return to rural peace (1918—34)
In 1915 Stonehenge was for sale, auctioned with the rest of the Antrobus estate and bought by Cecil Chubb, a local landowner, who presented it to the nation in 1918. As soon as the war ended, the Offce of Works took command, ordering an engineer's survey of all the stones, and then straightening and concreting the six sarsen uprights whose stability was in doubt.
  Responsibility for the archaeology was again entrusted to the Society of Antiquaries, which embarked, not on the minimal excavation required by the works, but on an aimless campaign of wholesale clearance under the direction of Colonel William Hawley. That disaster apart—for which the Offce of Works can scarcely be given principal blame—the policy was admirably modest, and 'anything that could possibly be considered as "smartening up" of this venerable monument carefully avoided' (Peers, 1919).
  The last road across Stonehenge, an admitted right of way, was finally closed, with local people being granted free admission in recognition of their lost rights.
  The surroundings of Stonehenge presented greater problems. Long before 1914, cultivation had crept across the grassland, and a pair of cottages had been built close by. The war saw the downland taken over by the military, and left Stonehenge hemmed in by the rotting remains of aircraft hangars, stores and barracks, a water tower, light railways, and so on. The Offce of Works urged the War ministry to have these relics cleared up (Offce of Works, 1919—20), but the land for the airfield had been requisitioned, not bought, and was therefore returned in 1927 to its pre-war owners, who turned its buildings into a pig-farm. A Stonehenge Café was being put up, and there was talk of colonies of bungalows. The Offce of Works was not empowered to buy the land itself; instead its permanent secretary, Sir Lionel Earle, helped to organize an appeal committee, which by 1930 raised the money to buy 1,500 acres of the surrounding land and, it was thought, to protect Stonehenge for ever by vesting the land in the National Trust. The aerodrome buildings were torn down, and so, in due course, were the cottages, the Stonehenge Café, and various hoardings.
  Further eyesores remained in the form of the two wooden huts just south of Stonehenge, where Colonel Hawley's finds were left after he stopped digging. Alexander Keiller offered in 1927 to build a Stonehenge Museum for them, on a site a distance to the east, in Stonehenge Bottom, and out of sight. Two designs were offered, and the drawings for one survive; it is hard to tell if its neo-Egyptian style is the one said to be 'possible but not wholly appropriate' or the alternative 'Utopian and simply produced as an experimental essay in idealism' (Keiller, 1927—9). Opposition to a site museum came from B. H. Cunnington of the Devizes museum and from O. G. S. Crawford, who asked, 'Why multiply these wretched little museums which are a plague to the student and not much good to the general public which is generally ignorant of their existence ? ' (Crawford, 1929). The huts were removed, and the finds went mostly to Salisbury museum. There had to be a building of some kind for a ticket-offce but it could, thought the Offce of Works architect, be slight, made of weathered oak and even deliberately temporarylooking. A below-ground shelter was considered as an alternative, 'but it would always make its presence felt and might appear "clever", and invite more attention than the purely temporary erection' (Offce of Works, 1929).
  One major intrusion survived, the A344 Amesbury to Shrewton road running close by on the north, only a few feet from the Heel Stone. (The Winterbourne Stoke road, the A303 further away to the south, was not then thought a nuisance.) The Offce of Works (1933a) pressed for the closure of this road 'which shaves past the Circle so that the Circle itself seems almost submerged by the congestion, vulgarity, speed and noise'. But in this case they were defeated, with the Road Fund declining to pay for the diversion, and worries that an Act of Parliament might be needed to authorize it.
  Apart from this setback, the Offce of Works had by the mid-1930s achieved its aim of restoring to Stonehenge 'a measure of isolation' (Office of Works, 1933b). That was a notable success, when it had been close to submergence under a clutter of building and sprawl, and when the numbers of visitors, about 20,000 annually just after the First War, were rising. Certainly there are many fond memories (e.g. Fowles & Brukoff, 1980, 5) of childhood visits in the 1930s and even in the 1950s, when the stones seemed to stand, free, uncluttered and unsuburban on the open down—in appearance almost as they had been centuries before.
4 Accommodating the numbers (1935—75)
Even before the last of the old clutter had gone, the backtracking began. The 1930s was the decade of the baby Austin and booming charabanc, and uncontrolled parking on the road verge by the Heel Stone, the most conspicuous place possible, became a nuisance. So a patch of the National Trust land was leased, and early in 1935 a car-park was made west of Stonehenge and north of the road, where the land drops away. (Pressure for lavatories was resisted: 'after all, the whole Plain is available for the convenience of the public' (Offce of Works, 1934.)) There were two responses to the car-park. The visitors parked by the Heel Stone as before; and the car-park became a separate focus of its own, proving a good pitch for AA patrols and ice-cream vendors (Offce of Works, 1935).
  In post-war years, the numbers of visitors grew and grew. As the figure reached a quarter-million, then half a million annually, one measure after another was thought necessary. Underground lavatories were dug, the car-park tarmacked and very much enlarged, an entrance tunnel laid under the road with semi-subterranean ticket-offce and cafe; more recently, overflow lavatories and an extra car-park have blossomed, first as temporary now as enduring features. (All these, it may be remembered, stand on land bought by public subscription expressly to prevent cafes and other buildings being put on it.)
  Trafic on both roads grew, making the A344 more obnoxious than ever and the A303 increasingly audible and visible. Intermittent vandalism, usually slogans painted on the sarsens, was particularly bad in the early 1960s. Precautions have included a system of 'Vigilante' geophones, underground microphones laid like a minefield; once it had been programmed to take no notice of the sound of moles (whose control is also a problem), this proved quite effective. Stonehenge is never left unsupervised now, with two custodians on duty every night of the year.
  Inside Stonehenge, drastic measures were taken. Atkinson and Piggott's excavations and the discovery of the prehistoric carvings brought more publicity, and more crowds. The stones which fell in 1797 and 1901 were restored, in part to save them from further damage by scrabbling shoes, and more concrete foundations put in. (Only seven sarsens now stand in original chalk sockets.) The grass in the centre died under the pressure, was reduced to a 'sea of mud' (Anc. Mon. Board, 1962, 3), and was replaced with orange gravel over a clinker foundation. It was ugly, abrasive, dusty in dry weather and before long spotted with puddles in wet; but it might be able to take a million pairs of feet. Each of these measures was defensive in character, a small retreat in the face of the relentless growth in numbers.
  Over the years, the summer solstice celebrations became larger, more drunkenly rowdy and eventually dangerous. Dr MacGregor Reid's bogus Druids (one of several groups whose connexions with the would-be I)ruids of the eighteenth-century Romantics, still less with the real Druids of Classical times, are extremely tenuous) had been granted admission by Cecil Chubb. In the 1920s, the Office of Works, after some nasty episodes of forcible entry, ritual cursing of the defending custodian, and accusations of religious intolerance, also gave way and let Dr Reid in. That was a mistake. The precedent was set that a group could acquire special rights over Stonehenge, if it was suffciently aggressive in demanding them. Gawping at or teasing the white-robed devotees soon became a principal feature of the attractions. From the early 1960s, admission for the solstice dawn has been severely restricted. Only the offcially sanctioned band of genuine bogus Druids, the press and Amesbury residents go in, and the ordinary fence is reinforced annually from late May to late June with great barbed-wire entanglements much taller and wider than a man, to ensure nothing goes inside more untoward than the DOE chooses to authorize.
  The summer solstice, already a bizarre event (Cutforth, 1970, is a restrained account), has become quite surreal since the Stonehenge Free Festival got going about eight years ago. This is now an established annual event, lasting ten days or so over the solstice period and dedicated (in the words of its own publicity) more to 'sex and drugs and rock'n'roll' than to earth mysteries or dreams of Logres. Although unoffcial and unlawful, the festival has achieved a modus vivendi with the DOE, whose superior fortifications deflect it from Stonehenge proper into an undefended field on National Trust land west of the car-park. The police supervise it from a full-scale temporary Stonehenge Police Station.
5. Crisis (1976—	
The petrol shortage of 1973 brought some respite in the growth of numbers, but 1975—with twothirds of a million visitors, the usual solstice nonsense, and the first full-scale festival—was a bad year.
  It was dawning on the DOE that somewhere along the line their Stonehenge policy might have gone a little wrong. For 1976 the admission charge in summer, when numbers go as high as 7,000 per day (Stonehenge Working Party, 1979, para. 2.8), was raised to 40P as a deliberate discouragement, though it was reduced to only lop off-season. (It was only a shilling (5P) as late as 1970.) Numbers in 1976 went down marginally, but were up to a new record 815,000 in 1977. For 1978 more drastic measures were taken. The centre was closed entirely and restored to turf. Visitors were kept to a circular path right round the outside of the ditch. The grass there, despite protective matting, quickly turned to mud. The final solution has been to lay a permanent path in green tarmac, which runs inside the ditch but still several metres from the central stones. Special access to the centre is allowed early in the morning, one day a week, for such groups as archaeological students on field trips, and also for all visitors on Tuesdays in the winter, from November to February only. Otherwise it is not possible to see clearly those features bluestone settings, sarsen masonry-work, prehistoric carvings—that make Stonehenge unique, unless you know exactly what to look for.
  The summer solstice ritual continues as before, inside the heaped coils of barbed-wire that look like something from the Battle of the Somme. The festival shows no sign whatever of fading away. It is especially deplored by the National Trust, whose land it occupies, but no action has been taken actively to discourage it. The fear has been voiced (e.g. Hamilton, 1978; Atkinson, 1978) of the '1 per cent of troublemakers' who may be ready with their brushes and pots of fluorescent paint; if those fears are well founded, Stonehenge is effectively held hostage by the festival in case the authorities do anything to offend.
  The DOE, though nominally hostile, makes two concessions to the festival. First, it compensates the National Trust for the damage caused to the crops and fences of the Trust's tenant. Secondly, it allows the festival to take control of the centre of Stonehenge for the solstice afternoon; no attempt is made to discourage climbing about on the stones, which at all other times is strictly forbidden.
  For 1983 the DOE decided its barbed wire was 'provocative' to the festival and put up only lightweight crowd barriers. On 21 June about 1000 festival-goers climbed them and occupied the stones at dawn. On the solstice itself (the 22nd), about 1,500 again saw no reason to be shut out when the offcially approved Druids and pressmen were let in, climbed the barriers and celebrated the sunrise with good humour at the centre of Stonehenge. There was no aggravation, no arrests and no immediate sign of damage, but the DoE's inability to manage midsummer events at Stonehenge was rather publicly underlined.
  These general arrangements seem likely to continue, and to provoke more criticism. The growth of facilities goes on gradually also. Arrangements for the Stonehenge garbage give an example. It was only in 1956 that enough rubbish was generated to require organized collection at all; in the 1980s it requires a special enclosure of jumbosized bins, which makes its own little eyesore at one end of the car-park.
Is there an alternative?
All in all, the immediate surroundings of Stonehenge are wholly unworthy of it. A leader in The Times sums it up: 'To continue to allow this marvellous relic of prehistoric ages to be ruthlessly disfigured and perish inch by inch would be an eternal disgrace to this country'. Those words, written in 1886 to describe the decay of the stones themselves (The Times, 1886), apply equally to their environment today (PL. XX11b). There have been decades of piecemeal accommodation to various pressures—from the Druids, from the rising tide of tourists, from the festival—without any long-term strategy or coherent plan of management and containment. Many examples could be given of the curious results that have followed; space allows mention of only a few.
  As the first experience with the car-park in 1935 showed, the provision of even minimal facilities generates more people and more traffc. According to 1972 figures, 32 per cent of people using its carpark do not go in to see Stonehenge at all (Stonehenge Working Party, 1979, Appendix D). The car-park, in fact, has itself become an attraction; it makes a convenient place for long-distance drivers on the A303 to stop for a stroll, a sandwich and the use of a lavatory.
  The café and bookstall, squeezed into cramped premises in the underground building, make quite a contrast. The café, let to an energetic private contractor, is open long hours and sells a wide range of refreshments. The bookstall, run by the DOE itself, is often shut and sells a miserably restricted range when it manages to be open. L. V. Grinsell's excellent and very cheap booklet on The Druids and Stonehenge, for instance, is not stocked lest considerations of balance might be thought to compel the DOE also to sell publications put out by the bogus Druids.
  Perhaps the worst single feature is the insensitive design of the car-park and buildings, which 'recalls that of a motorway pull-in' (Binney, 1977). Take the sloping approach to Stonehenge from the entrance tunnel for instance. Part of the astonishment of Stonehenge is in its materials, the great elephant-grey slabs of stone that seem alien in a chalk landscape. But the walls of the sunken path are not made of the local building materials— timber, chalk or flint; they are faced instead with monolithic slabs of rough-cast grey concrete (chosen presumably on the simple grounds of cost), which make a shoddy echo of Stonehenge itself (PL. XXIII).
  Certainly, managing Stonehenge presents great problems; there are now more visitors in a single high-summer week than there were in a whole pre-war year. But Stonehenge has survived too many threats in the past to be lightly let go, and examples elsewhere show what might be salvaged. The summit of Snowdon, the highest mountain in Wales, is a tourist focus with striking similarities to Stonehenge. It is a 'honey-pot' attraction everyone wants to visit and has therefore been 'irreversibly popularized' ; its facilities were inadequate to cope with the numbers, and failed to match the quality of their surroundings. A consultant's report (Manasseh, 1978) for the Countryside Commission made strong and positive recommendations for improvement. The proposed new summit buildings have proved too expensive, but more modest measures of management and discreet visitor control are successfully going ahead. On Hadrian's Wall, a comparable study is also leading to coherent management plans to spread the impact of visitors.
  No such independent study has been made of Stonehenge. In 1976, Peter Lloyd Jones, the head of three-dimensional design at Kingston Polytechnic, proposed on his own initiative a plan for a 'prehistory discovery park' round Stonehenge. It would encourage visitors, as they set out from a new visitor centre well away from Stonehenge, to go instead along trails to other monuments, the barrows, cursus, and so on. The details of his scheme can be questioned; however important archaeologically, these chalk-built monuments are not immediately exciting to look at, and they are very vulnerable to erosion. But it does show how valuable a fresh approach to the whole Stonehenge question might be.
The Stonehenge Working Party
Lady Birk, the minister responsible when the crisis blew up in 1976, promised wide consultation. Alternative schemes were to be exhibited in London and Salisbury for public comment. A Stonehenge Working Party (1979, preface) was set up to 'consider means of improving the setting of Stonehenge and facilities for visitors', with representatives from interested parties. While the DOE went ahead with immediate measures, the Working Party tried to plan for the long term. Its majority report recommended closing the Shrewton road and erasing the present car-park and facilities, as had the Ancient Monuments Board (1977, 9). A new car-park, at least three times the size of the present one, would be made much further away, and there would be fuller facilities for visitors, who would walk up paths from Stonehenge Bottom. This plan, in several variants, was unacceptable to representatives of the district council, whose memorandum of dissent (Stonehenge Working Party, 1979, Appendix o) argued for retention of the Shrewton road and the existing car-park site. Understandably but regrettably, the report did not say whether there should be a future for the festival.
  On the central question, the matter of numbers, the working party was cautious. It thought that people 'should not, and probably could not, be deterred' from visiting Stonehenge, by high admission prices or other means (paras. 4.1—4-5). Therefore, the new facilities should provide for a further substantial increase in numbers, perhaps 50 per cent over the next decade (though no figure is stated). But it declined to endorse the Department of Transport's belief that parking for 1,000 cars should be allowed for (para. 4.14),
  In short, the working party recommends accommodating the numbers, as before, and hopes they will not drift too high.
 An alternative approach, explored by Professor R. J. C. Atkinson and other archaeological members of the working party, takes as its startingpoint not the demand but the supply: that is, the maximum number of people who can see Stonehenge properly without harming it. 'Properly' may be taken to mean 'allowed to walk freely on grass among the stones', and the limiting factor is the survival of the turf. The experience of the 1950s suggests it can take at the most 200,000—250,000 visitors annually—or less than a third of the numbers in recent years. There is everything to be said for this policy. Unfortunately it would require such drastic discouragement to keep the numbers down that it is not thought politically practicable.
  In any case, by the time the working party submitted its report in 1979, the politicians had moved on. The Conservative government remained silent until the autumn of 1981, when it became known that the report would not be acted upon, because of the expense and the local opposition. It has not even been published, and the consultation that was promised has not taken place. Nevertheless, the DOE insists that the report has not been suppressed, merely that its publication would not be 'costeffective'. This is a strange claim, since the report is a typed document of less than 50 A4 pages, and one may think that behind it lies a reluctance to tackle head-on and in public the intractable problems presented by the future management of Stonehenge.
  There matters rest. As the land round Stonehenge is held inalienably, the National Trust has an effective right of veto over any proposals for change. The DOE has since decided it wants to enlarge the facilities on the existing site. The Trust rightly insists that the present site (chosen in 1935 after no great thought and with only a few parked cars in mind) is far too close to Stonehenge. It is therefore firmly resisting these new DOE proposals, whose existence has not been made public. In the next few months we shall discover if the new organization responsible for ancient monuments will push ahead with the scheme it inherits, or if it has other ideas ; certainly there should be the promised public consultation. If the facilities are to be improved, they cannot be left 'on the threshold of the temple', which once more should be distanced from 'profane buildings and traffc'. That must mean closing the road by the Heel Stone, and abandoning the present car-park site for one at a proper distance, in Stonehenge Bottom or elsewhere. It could also mean an imaginative scheme to show Stonehenge to visitors in the proper context of its ancient landscape, restored to open unfenced downland.

  Fig. r. Recent changes in the immediate Stonehenge area, with one of the working Party's proposals for new access facilities. The map excludes changes in the more distant landscape such as military buildings on north and east horizons, nor can it show the visual effects of busier roads and changed farming practices  Certainly there is no point in building again and ruining more downland if the result is another ugly, short-term botch. But even with the present facilities, a start can be made. A certain number of visitors can be allowed among the stones without unfair discrimination (e.g. by opening the centre for the first hour each day). The bookstall can open longer hours. Non-visitors can be discouraged from using the car-park. The festival can be found a more suitable site. These kinds of measures may not, probably will not, suffce—but they should be tried.
BIBLIOGRAPHY  Perhaps no agreed way forward can be found that does not involve intolerable restrictions, expense, danger to the survival of Stonehenge, or archaeological damage. The best long-term answer might, alas, be to steer people instead towards a concrete replica in, say, Longleat safari park. But it would be wrong to acquiesce in the further ruin of its environment, universally agreed to be unworthy of Europe's most famous ancient monument, without really determined efforts to provide it with something better.
  
ANCIENT MONUMENTS BOARD FOR ENGLAND. 1962. Report for 1961 (London).
1977. Report for 1976 (London).
ANTROBUS, E. 1894. Letter to Commissioner of Works in Public Record Offce (PRO) WORK/ 14 213.
ATKINSON, R. J. c. 1960. Stonehenge (Harmondsworth).
1978. Letter, quoted in Antiquity, Lll, 178.
1979. Appendix 11 to Stonehenge (1979 reprint).
AUBREY, J, 1685. Monumenta Britannica, quoted in W. Long, Stonehenge and its barrows (Devizes, 1876), 35.
BINNEY, M. 1977. Stonehenge under siege, Country Life, 8 September.
BROWNE, H. 1833. An illustration of Stonehenge and Abury . . 2nd ed. (Salisbury).
CHIPPINDALE, c. 1978. The enclosure of Stonehenge, Wilts. Arch. Nat, Hist. Mag., LXX—LXXI, 109—23.
1983a. Stonehenge Complete (London).
1983b. Stonehenge, General Pitt-Rivers, and the first Ancient Monuments Act, Archaeological Review from Cambridge, Il, 59—65.
CRAWFORD, o. G. S. 1929. Letter in PRO WORK/14 489.
CUTFORTH, R. 1970. Stonehenge at midsummer, Antiquity, XLIV, 305—7.
DYER, J. 1978. Letter, quoted in Antiquity, LIT, 178.
FOLKERZHEIMER, H. 1562. Letter to Josiah Simler, in (ed.) H. Robinson, The Zurich letters (second series) . . . (London, 1845), letter 39.
FOWLES, J. & B. BRUKOFF. 1980. The enigma of Stonehenge (London).
GOWLAND, W. 1902. Recent excavations at Stonehenge, Archaeologia, LXVIII, 38—119.
HAMILTON, M. 1978. Letter, The Times, 21 June.
HARPER, G. c. 1899. The Exeter road (London).
HUTCHINSON, H. G. 1914. The life of Sir john Lubbock, 11 (London).
JONES, 1. & J. WEBB. 1655. The most notable antiquity of Great Britain, vulgarly called Stone-heng (London).
KEJLLER, A. 1927—9. Letters in PRO WORK/14 489.
LE GALLIENNE, R. 1900. Travels in England (London).
MANASSEH, L. , & Partners. 1978. Snowdon summit (Cheltenham).
OFFICE OF WORKS. 1919—20. Correspondence in PRO WORK/14 488. 1929. Memorandum from Chief Architect in PRO WORK/14 489.
1933a, Memorandum in PRO WORK/ 14 838.
1933b. Minutes after visit to Stonehenge in PRO WORK/ 14 837.
1934. Memorandum in PRO WORK/ 14 840.
1935. Memoranda in PRO WORK/ 14 840.
PEERS, C. R. 1919. Memorandum in PRO WORK/ 14 485.
PEPYS, s. 1668. Diary, 11 June, in (ed.) R. Latham and W. Matthews, The diary of Samuel Pepys, IX (London, 1976), 229.
PITT-RIVERS, A. 1893. Report on Stonehenge in PRO WORK/14 213.
PUGH, R. B. (ed.). 1947. Calendar of Antrobus deeds before 1625 (Devizes).
STONEHENGE WORKING PARTY. 1979. Report to Department of the Environment (unpublished).
STUKELEY, w. 1740. Stonehenge (London).
The Times. 1886. Editorial. 18 August.
'VACATION RAMBLER'. 1871. Stonehenge, The Times, 14 September.
WILTSHIRE ARCHAEOLOGICAL SOCIETY. 1886. Report of deputation to examine into the present state of the stones at Stonehenge, Wilts. Arch. Nat. Hist. Mag., xxrr, 102—7.
Book Chronicle
We include here books which have been received for review, or books of importance (not received for review) of which we have recently been informed. We welcome information about books, particularly in languages other than English, of interest to readers of ANTIQUITY. The listing of a book in this chronicle does not preclude its review in ANTIQUITY.WOOD, J. 1747. Choir Gaure . . . (London).
  
Philamoudi Vounari: a sanctuary site in Cyprus by Selma M. S. Al-Radi. Studies in Mediterranean Archaeology, LXV. Göteborg : Paul Aström, 1983. 140 pp., 17 figs., 52 pls. 175 SKr.
Hunter-gatherer economy in prehistory: a European perspective edited by Geoff Bailey. New Directions in Archaeology series. Cambridge, London, Nezv York : Cambridge University Press, 1983. 256 pp., many figs. {25.00.
L'art pariétal de Roumgnac by Claude Barriére. Paris : Picard, 1982. 208 pp., 519 figs., 6 pls. (in colour).
Studies in numismatic method presented to Philip Grierson, edited by C. N. L. Brooke, B. H. 1. H. Stewart, J. G. Pollard & T. R. Volk. Cambridge, London, New York : Cambridge University Press, 1983. 368 pp., many illus. {50.00.
Arthur Evans and the Palace of Minos by Ann Brown. Oxford : Ashmo[ean Museum, 1983. 110 pp., many figs. {4-95.
The megalithic tombs of the Cotswold-Severn region by T. C. Darvill. Vorda Research Series No. 5. Highworth: Vorda, 1982. 158 pp., 37 figs., 3 P ls. {9-95.
Inventaire des mégalithes de la France. 7. Aveyron. 1. L'Ouest Aveyronnais: Causses de Limogne et de la Villeneuve by Jean Clottes and Claude Maurand. Gallia Préhistoire, Supplément 1. Paris: Éditions CNRS, 1983. 122 pp., 63 figs., 10 pls. 115 FF.
European economic prehistory: a new approach by Robin Dennell. London, New York, Paris: Academic Press, 1983. 222 pp., 29 figs. 05.00.
Thera: Pompeii of the ancient Aegean by Christos G. Doumas. New Aspects of Antiquity series. London : Thames €3 Hudson, 19%. 168 PP•, 123 illus. (15 in colour). {16.00.
Ancient Exmoor: a study of the archaeology and prehistory of Exmoor by Hazel EardleyWilmot. Dulverton : The Exmoor Press, 7983. 72 pp., illus. {2.50.
Studies in the history and archaeology of Jordan, I edited by Adnan Hadidi. Amman : Department of Antiquities, 1982. Distributed in England by Norman Hurst Ltd., 131 Trafalgar Road, London SE 10. 400 pp., many illus. {35.00. continued on p. 186
  


PLATE x x 11 .• WHAT FUTURE FOR STONEHENGE ?
(a) Approach to Stonehenge, Midsummer solstice 1716 : barrow and open downland. A shepherd waits by the stones ready to shear the visitors' sixpences. (b) Approach today, off-season : tarmac and portable lavatories. In midsummer the cars spill over the grass, more huttery goes up, and the foreground field is occupied by the
Free Festival
see pp. 172-80	Photos: a, National Monuments Record; b, C. ChippindaZe

PLATE X X 111 : WHAT FUTURE FOR STONEHENGE ?
The Present tunnel entrance to Stonehenge : concrete at its grey nastiest.
TIE bookshop, characteristically, is shut
see pp. 172-80	Photo: C. Chippindale
174	ANTIQUITY
  
	WHAT FUTURE FOR STONEHENGE?	173
  

  

  

  

  
