What future for Avebury?
MICHAEL PITTS *
The great complex of Neolithic monuments at Avebury in Wiltshire is, deservedly, a World Heritage Site (FIGURE 1). Avebury is a living village, as well as an ancient monument, and the conflicts between the various interests of archaeologists, of visitors, of residents — are as acute as anywhere. Michael Pitts knows many of these röles, as an archaeologist and sometime curator of the Keiller Museum in Avebury, as owner of the splendid Stones Restaurant in the village and publisher of guide-books and postcards, and as an in-coming resident to Avebury. Curiously, as he explains, the future of Avebury seems to depend scarcely at all on a national interest, still less on a world view of the heritage; rather it is the local concerns that will direct it for us all.
  
Towards the end of 1989, Lord Montagu of Beaulieu, Chairman of English Heritage, announced that detailed planning had started on a visitor centre at Stonehenge. For someone not touched by the generations of wrangling over this site, or spared the depressing squalor with which a visit deftly obliterates any preconceptions of mystery or romance, what could be more appropriate than good visitor facilities at one of the world's top heritage attractions? What could be simpler to construct in an open landscape of not particularly valuable farmland?
  Of course, Stonehenge is not like that. This small group of standing stones by a road has provoked one of the most complex, bitter, and long-running archaeo-political stories of all time. It will run and run — make no doubt about that but Lord Montagu 's announcement has a real significance for anyone with an interest in our past. Someone is actually trying to do something about the place.
  Twenty-five km north of Stonehenge is another stone circle. This one is bigger  its diameter, is over 10 times that of Stonehenge. It also has a few trimmings that Stonehenge cannot boast. There is a bank around the stone circle that may be the largest surviving earthwork of this antiquity anywhere in the world. There is a mound that is the largest pile in
	4 Green St, Avebury, Marlborough, Wiltshire, SN8 IRE.
ANTIQUITY 64 (1990): 259-74
ancient Europe. There are rows of megaliths even bigger than the circle . . . . To add to the scene, sprawled in and around the monument is a settlement with all the interest and appeal of a typical English village. Inside this circle there is not just a bored man in a uniform trying to keep out the tourists: there are people living and working worshipping even (a United Reformed Church will be celebrating its restoration in 1990); indeed, in one small cottage, as I write these very words, a paper for a journal called Antiquity is emerging . . . .
  The less elegant ruins 25 km to the south have attracted to themselves most of the archaeological effort and an elephantine share of public concern and controversy. Avebury the bigger circle to the north — has seen some important fieldwork, but until recently, she has been content to lie in relative peace in the rolling landscape of the Marlborough Downs, unveiling herself to those sensitive few with the knowledge and determination to seek her out. In the memorable phrase of a travel article that went round the American press a few years ago, Avebury was 'the connoisseur's Stonehenge'.
  Was. Just as Stonehenge gets its visitor centre, Avebury gets the visitors. Picture this. A carpark with extensions bigger than the original park so packed that no-one can escape. Or get in: a major through-road (too major to allow the
  

  
placing of pedestrian-crossings or a speedlimit) is in a traffic deadlock that only the police can unscramble. All eleven of the outlets with something to sell (from the Italian burger man in his jingly van or the ladies in the village hall with 'Teas for Tourists', to the scented National Trust gift shop and Avebury Manor's 'Elizabethan Fayre'): all eleven report record attendances and record takings. There is plenty of opportunity to spend money. Choose from 76 postcards of Avebury; fill your car with anything from local wines and organic lamb to a selection from the 80 (eighty) 'unique' monogrammed lines in the Avebury Manor Gift Shop (round the corner, the poor little English Heritage Museum can manage less than a dozen 'unique' gifts). There are four chances to buy ice-cream — ranging from additive-free to the more traditional dairy-free.
  Despite all the potential custom, there is a little tension between some of the traders, as rival advertising posters are surreptitiously 'collected'. A gentle lady innocently interviewing visitors for a survey sponsored by English Heritage, is sent cowering into a dark corner of the Museum after being called 'an old bag' by the Manor owner. The local paper reports
SNACK BAN ROW SOURS FOOD FAIR
A ban on the sale of snacks left a bitter taste at an otherwise successful Wiltshire Food Fair, held at the Great Barn, Avebury. Thousands of people flocked to the two-day event which featured food and drink producers from all over the county. However exhibitors were warned that they would not be allowed to sell snacks or drinks after objections from the nearby Stones Restaurant .
Meanwhile, if the 'Elizabethan music, sword fights, and a beggars' brawl' at the Manor are just too much, why not escape in a hot-air balloon ride? Be sure to return in time for 'the arrival of Good Queen Bess', the sign that the firework display and pig roast are to begin.
  This is not fiction. On 28 August 1989 — Bank Holiday Monday — there were more people in Avebury than ever before. And this is the beginning. Last year, with three public enquiries, the announcement of a major National Trust land purchase, increased archaeological activity — and mysterious rings in wheat-fields by Silbury Hill — the media hit Avebury. They found a pot of gold. Avebury is all set to develop into an archaeological story that will leave Stonehenge forgotten by the roadside.
FIGURE 1. Key to the Avebury region. 'The Avebury Complex' was defined in the early 1970s, by agreement between the then curator of the Alexander Keiller Museum and the Wiltshire
Archaeological Society. It was intended as a museum collecting area, but a collection policy was never fully described (the Museum currently has neither policy nor curator). It is mostly coincident with the parish boundary, but also takes in the whole of Windmill Hill, the whole of the enclosure at West Kennet Farm, and the area around the East Kennet Long Barrow: this is not a characteristic of the Local Plan (restricted to Avebury parish) or the World Heritage Site (similarly defined, except to the west). 
1 Windmill Hill enclosure
2 Avebury stone circles
3 West Kennet Avenue
4 Course of Beckhampton Avenue
5 Long Stones
6 Faulkner's stone circle
7 Silbury Hill
8 West Kennet Long Barrow
9 The Sanctuary
10 East Kennet Long Barrow
11 Unconfirmed stone circles
12 Roman Road
13 Round barrows
14 West Kennet palisaded enclosure  The controversies will grow. On the horizon are the actual development of a variety of commercial properties, major road alterations, new car-parks . and we still await the outcome of two of the three enquiries. What is the background to these developments, and what lies in store? Is it too late to 'save' Avebury?
The story so far: archaeology, conservation and planning (TABLE 1)
The world has always come tardily to Avebury. While medieval scribes had elaborated on Stonehenge's mysteries, it was not until 1649 that the megaliths to the north were dramatically 'discovered' when John Aubrey passed through on horseback. Aubrey never fully published his surveys, and it was left to William Stukeley 70 years later to follow up with six years of superb quality fieldwork, beautifully published (Piggott 1950).
  St.ukeley happened to be in Avebury at a time of major destruction, as megaliths were smashed by landowners for building stone. In the later 19th century the first serious attempts
1650
1700
1800
1850 
Silbury and West Kennet Long
		Barrow the first Scheduled Ancient
1900 e	Monuments
1910 
1920
to stop such damage came to a head with Sir John Lubbock's Ancient Monuments Act, which led to two of Avebury's sites — Silbury Hill and the West Kennet Long Barrow — heading the first list of Scheduled Monuments. Lubbock (who later chose to take the name of Lord Avebury) actually bought part of the stone circle to thwart a proposed housing programme.
  Archaeological investigations had been conducted sporadically around the prehistoric complex since the later 17th century (mostly at the two mounds subsequently Scheduled). The first systematic project at the circles themselves was directed by Harold St George Gray between 1908 and 1922 (one of his huge sections into the ditch was left open throughout the Great War,
1930 
Alexander Keiller Museum opened
1940	First National Trust purchase
Monuments taken into Guardianship
1950
 West Kennet Long Barrow restored
     Fyfield Down Nature Reserve 1960 County Development Plan
Gabrielle Keiller Deed of Gift
1970
North Wessex Downs AONB
Ridgeway Long Distance Path
Avebury & West Kennet Conservation
	Areas
1980	NE Wilts. Structure Plan
Wilts. Landscape Local Plan
Avebury declared a World Heritage Site
		Kennet Council Avebury Local Plan
1990	Second National Trust purchases
represents an excavation into one of the monuments now under English Heritage Guardianship.TABLE 1. Some events in the archaeology and conservation of Avebury. Each of the blobs
awaiting his return!) (Gray 1935). Gray was involved in the early stages of what became Avebury's most significant series of excavations, which began at the settlement on Windmill Hill in 1925. After five seasons there, Alexander Keiller directed his interest to the stone rings and the West Kennet Avenue (1934—9) — inspired, partly, by his purchase of a collection of Stukeley's field drawings (Smith 1965). Meanwhile, in a typically chaotic assault, a local museum archaeologist identified and then completely excavated a series of stone and timber rings first recorded by Stukeley at the end of the West Kennet Avenue (Cunnington
  Keiller was able to buy the Elizabethan Manor House and its farm, giving him a free hand with restoration and excavation. The local controversies he inspired, conspicuously unrecorded in the archaeological literature, were sometimes bitter. One letter to the Evening Advertiser (23 July 1937) says it all. It complains of 'the wanton destruction which is taking place . . . under the guise of the "Preservation of Rural Avebury" . as the whole scheme is being engineered by outside influences, the peace of mind of the Avebury people is disturbed'. The writers bemoan the destruction of beautiful trees, the cemetery-like effect of the newly-disinterred megaliths, and the delay in a much-needed council housing scheme. 'We are told that we cannot rebuild on our own properties, but a factory type of building . has been erected within a few hundred yards of the Sacred Circle. ' This was the present petrol station, built to replace the garage inside the Sacred Circle, which Keiller demolished.
  Keiller's property became the core of the first National Trust purchase in 1942, which followed the establishment in 1937 of the Avebury Preservation Fund. The 905 acres (365 ha) of this estate included the prehistoric settlement on Windmill Hill, the entire stone circle, the northern end of the West Kennet Avenue and an area of downland. Significantly, it did not take in the Manor House itself, which was left as a rather cumbersome and decaying private home with very little land. To complete this story of definitive preservation, the monuments were all taken into Guardianship by the Ministry of Works in January 1944.
  The Ministry were behind the excavation and restoration of the West Kennet Long Barrow in 1955—6 (Piggott 1962). Like Keiller's work on the stone circles and avenue, this project intended to improve presentation of the site to the public, as well as increase understanding.
  And that, archaeologically, is more or less where things stand today*. Since 1960 there have been numerous minor digs that have explored questions of interpretation, or attempted to save a record in the face of road-works or building — much of this still unpublished. A useful study of finds from earlier surface collecting, supplemented by new survey work, was conducted in 1983 (Holgate 1987). John Evans has been exploring the ecological history of the area for 20 years (Evans 1972; Evans et al. 1985). His work made possible a stimulating review of Neolithic farming history (Smith 1984). As I write, results are coming through from a series of samples from old excavations (collected nearly 10 years ago when I was curator of the Alexander Keiller Museum) that will give Avebury its first radiocarbon determinations. Finally, Alasdair Whittle's identification of a major prehistoric enclosure at West Kennet Farm in 1987 — in one of a continuing series of small, sensitively-chosen excavations is a dramatic indication of the still primitive state of our knowledge of the ancient landscape.
  If major excavation ceased with the outbreak of the last War, however, it was then that planners and conservationists really woke up. I have already described the National Trust's acquisition and the taking of Avebury into Guardianship, all of which occurred during the War. Over the last 30 years a succession of mainly local initiatives has built on this foundation, so that today the monuments and the surrounding landscape are exceptionally well covered with a network of formal Plans, Maps and Areas.
  The first protection came from the Wiltshire County Council in 1959, in their County Development Plan, particularly as detailed in the Avebury Inset Map (the proposals for which occupied a whole page out of 55 dealing with the entire county). This sought to protect the ancient monuments, and 'improve the environs and approaches'; and, further, to provide housing and ancillary accommodation in the adjacent hamlet of Avebury Trusloe for people
 Smith (1965) and Burl (1979) have more detailed summaries and bibliographies of the earlier work.
displaced by the first policy. To these ends, additional land was allocated at Trusloe for residential development up until 1981; a by-pass was proposed to the west and north of the stone circles (to replace the road passing through the centre); 'safeguarding areas' were defined around ancient sites of 'special archaeological interest', where development would not normally be permitted; and a high standard of design in new or extended building was to be expected. *
  The reference to housing in Avebury Trusloe needs a little explanation. Keiller's dream was to remove all 'modern encumbrances' from the area of the stone circles. This meant not only trees, rubbish and fencing but also quality buildings. His policy, adopted by the National Trust and the Ministry of Works, is reflected in the County Plan. By 1960, however, attitudes were changing. In that year, the Ancient Monuments Board rescinded house-destruction as a worthy procedure; in 1963, a review of the County Plan, noting that, in addition to the garage referred to above, seven substantial cottages and a Baptist chapel had been removed, quoted the Ministry's changed views; and the National Trust's Report (see below) of 1976 published this body's formal agreement with a policy of preservation, not just of the stone circle, but of the entire village environment (FIGURE 2).
  Not the least remarkable aspect of this extraordinary plan to demolish half a historic village (FIGURE 3) and replace it a few hundred yards away with local authority housing, lies in the archaeology of Avebury. Keiller wanted his stone circles inside their circular earthwork, with nothing but grass between them. His vision does not seem to have extended beyond the bounds of his own land. Replacement housing was constructed in the immediate vicinity of
 The 1959 County Plan was succeeded in 1981 by the North East Wiltshire Structure Plan, which, in its updated form, lasts until 1996. This broadly confirms the Avebury policies of 20 years earlier, except for the withdrawal of support for a by-pass, whose 'economic performance was not outstanding'.
the prehistoric complex, in an area where contemporary settlement might well be expected and across the course of the Beckhampton Avenue — a now vanished megalithic structure that Keiller and his colleagues themselves identified with the help of the Stukeley papers.
  Left to themselves, however, the planning authorities have been consistently more broadminded. In 1972, under the terms of the National Parks Act, the North Wessex Downs Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty, within which lie all the Avebury monuments, was described. AONB nomination confers powers of environmental protection; unlike the archaeological legislation then available, it relates to complete landscapes rather than isolated sites. The following year the Ridgeway Long Distance Route was established, a formally-defined public path that ends at Avebury. The County Council designated two Conservation Areas in 1975, centred on Avebury and on West Kennet, giving itself enhanced powers of control over development. Following this, Kennet District Council joined with the County Council in a Conservation Area study, and in the late 1970s, moves were made towards a Village Plan. Villagers, the National Trust and the then Department of the Environment (formerly the Ministry of Works, now English Heritage) were involved, considering old issues such as the proposed by-pass, and new ones like the inadequacies of car-parking and erosion of the monuments caused by visitors. No formal report was published, however.
  More protection came in 1986 with the Wiltshire Landscape Local Plan, drawn up by the County Council. This Plan defines an 'Area of High Ecological Value' to the west of Avebury
('Area 5 — Roundway') and also an 'Area of Special Archaeological Significance' ('Area 12 Northern Chalkland') which entirely contains the Avebury region. The Plan's policies seek to preserve landscapes of high ecological and archaeological interest, respectively, and also to improve public access and the provision of visitor information.
  In the meantime, two non-governmental studies were published: by the National Trust
  
FIGURE 2. Stone circles with village. The Alexander Keiller Museum is owned by the National Trust, though standing within Avebury Manor grounds. The collections were given to the nation by Keiller's widow in 1966, and are curated by English Heritage.
  

  

FIGURE 3. 'Archaeological' work in Avebury earlier this century involved excavation, earth-moving, tree-felling, demolition and new building, all of a nature that today would come into conflict with planning policies. Major excavation now would probably have to follow another Public Enquiry. Photography Alexander Keiller 1937—9, courtesy of English Heritage.
  
(1976), concerned with the proper management and presentation of their property at Avebury, and by the Wiltshire branch of the Royal Institute of British Architects (1974). The RIBA proposals bear quoting in some detail. They were:
1 The Avebury by-pass was an urgent requirement
2 A new car and coach park be built north and east of the stone circle
3 All fencing inside the stone circles be removed
4 Part of the road passing through the circles be grassed over
5 Provisions be made for toilets and catering, and an Information Centre be provided 'at which explanations of the past history of the area can be given to visitors'
6 Avebury be considered as a venue for a 'new Museum building to house the treasures of the Wiltshire Archaeological Society and other finds from excavations in the locality
of which Avebury is the natural centre and where so much of interest can be studied at the same time'.
  Certain of these recommendations were echoed by the National Trust. Principal among these was the need for improved visitor facilities, with particular reference to the development of former farm buildings in the Trust's ownership (media anguish at the situation was attracted when a large traditional-style barn was nearly destroyed in a storm). This led to the opening of The Great Barn Museum (managed by the Wiltshire Folk Life Society) in 1979, with attendant restaurant and toilets, and a National Trust Shop. This short RIBA paper remains the only really constructive study, dealing with the whole of Avebury, to emerge since 'The Plan for Avebury' was launched in 1937.
  Finally, in the year 1989 — when the National Trust bought a further 480 acres (195 ha) of downland and the site of the former Ridgeway Cafe opposite The Sanctuary, and Avebury was designated a World Heritage Site — the District Council at last published a Draft Local Plan. This considers in detail the needs of archaeological protection, and of tourists, residents and businesses. Amongst many proposals, the Plan revives the idea of a by-pass road.
  While all these schemes for protection and preservation were being put together, the actual threat from development was almost non-existent — a measure of the success of the legislation, or of its forward vision. In 1978 an applicant wishing to open a new bookshop and post-office inside the circle was refused permission on appeal (the old post-office, a National Trust house, has since re-opened). In 1986, Stones Restaurant (the current occupants of the site beside the Great Barn) appealed against the District Council's refusal to allow them to place a menu board near the village high street. The intense concern this board aroused — rivalled only by British Telecom's attempt to remove a traditional-style 'phone box a year later; the red kiosk is now safely preserved in the up-dated Statutory List of Buildings — is in itself clear indication of the lack of seriously damaging proposals for over half a century. In fact the only significant developments had been promulgated by Avebury's custodians: the restoration of the Great Barn complex by the National Trust, and the construction of a progressively bigger carpark to the south of the village by the County Council (for 150 cars in 1976, now for twice
  Everything changed very suddenly in October 1987. Just as Stones Restaurant won their menu-board appeal, proposals were announced for a futuristically-shaped hotel, restaurant and conference centre opposite the Sanctuary. The Wiltshire Gazette (1 October 1987) sensed a row on the horizon. The former Ridgeway Cafe had been bought by Kathy and Brian Ashley, owners of the Henge Shop and Gallery inside the circle. 'The couple realize,' said the paper, 'that the proposed design of the buildings on the skyline site is likely to create a stir.' What even the journalist could not foresee, however, was that this hotel proposal was only the first, and the smallest, of three commercial schemes that would all go to Public Enquiry within the space of a year.
The Romantics
The Ashleys moved into Avebury in 1984, when they bought the sole privately-owned retail outlet, a long-standing, and very low-key, souvenir- and craft-shop. Mr Ashley's enthusiasm for Avebury's archaeology and the needs of visitors runs well in advance of his planning tact, a characteristic neatly encapsulated in his new shop-signs. They are bigger and more numerous than their barely-visible predecessors, and naturally brought the wrath of the community down on him with immutable weight. But his chosen name for the shop celebrates his love of the stone circles: 'The Henge'.
  Two years later, the Ashleys bought the Ridgeway Cafe, a transport cafe with a glorious past, but by then a dilapidated, untidy wreck of a site, without even the redeeming feature of a quality cup of tea. When new (before the days of strict planning controls) this cafe was a jerrybuilt eyesore; but it had been there so long that few felt the need to comment on its incongruity. Not so Mr Ashley. When it came on the market, he saw his opportunity to right a wrong. Avebury is one of the great wonders of the ancient world, and with the cafe site was an opportunity at once to delete the existing blot, and in its stead construct something that shouted to the passing traveller 'You are entering something special.' If the District Council could not erect a road sign pointing to Avebury village, Mr Ashley would build three tall coneshaped buildings 'echoing the shape of the round barrows which are all around here' (the largest cone would be the exact diameter of the Sanctuary opposite), and house within them a hotel, walkers' hostel, restaurant and 'information centre'.
  There was immediate uproar. Don Brothwell, lecturer at the London Institute of Archaeology, assisted by Isobel Smith (the same I.F. Smith who published Keiller's excavations in such classic style), both Avebury residents, formed 'Save Our Skyline' to channel archaeological anger. Objections poured in to the District Council, and their Planning Committee duly rejected the application. Then, in a bizarre twist early in 1988, the decision was referred to a meeting of the full Council, and the planners' views were overturned by one vote. It seemed that the new awareness of the economic potential of tourism in the District was already influencing other policies.
  The application had been called in by the Secretary of State for the Environment, however, and in September 1988 a Public Enquiry was held in Devizes. The Inspector's report, an extremely well-written document that bears serious reading from anyone concerned with these issues, appeared in April 1989, and its conclusions were supported by the then Secretary, Nicholas Ridley: 'the design by its very controversial nature would bring an incongruous feature to the scene, at least in some eyes, and for this reason should not be permitted', The Inspector, Mr M.M. Cross, found the potential archaeology of the site a 'strong argument in favour of controlling any development carefully, but not in itself sufficient reason to refuse planning permission'. He referred constantly to the various planning controls, and the proposals were seen as a 'substantial departure' from the Structure Plan. There were also serious problems with the applicants' interitions for car access and parking. Indeed, it always seemed to me that the application should have been thrown out at the beginning on these grounds alone. Despite advice from the District Council, the Ashleys had not given these matters the attention they deserved — an indication of their at times naive tactics.
  Although his business plans came to nought, in one sense Mr Ashley's achievements with the Ridgeway Cafe, even in his own eyes, should be highly regarded. In October 1989 it was announced that the National Trust had agreed to buy the site, and that they would clear it and lay it down to grass — an outcome that every archaeologist should support. But beyond the boundaries of the three-quarter-acre plot, the whole of Avebury is already benefiting. The archaeological community was suddenly shocked into realizing that something was happening. Issues that should have been aired decades ago (and were only briefly exposed by the 1974 RIBA paper) were front-page news. An articulate local pressure group had been formed, and its bank account was still healthy. All of which was a very good thing: the real battles were still to come.
The Diplomats
Two months before the start of the Ridgeway Cafe Enquiry, outline planning applications for another hotel in Avebury parish were received by the District Council, to be opened in converted buildings at West Kennet Farm. The full applications followed two days before Christmas. Both dates are significant for the presence of competing interests in the calendar, and whether coincidentally or not — set the pattern for the uncharacteristically low profile kept by these new arrivals, Marlborough Homes Ltd. Predictably, the applications were called in for determination by the Secretary of State, in February 1989, and a Public Enquiry held in August. The report is not yet published.
  The site in question has something in common with the Ridgeway Cafe: it consists of a group of semi-derelict structures that no-one took much interest in. The differences lie in the scale— West Kennet Farm is vast— the location — the Cafe is on an otherwise bare hill-top, while the Farm nestles amongst trees in a valley — and the historic interest of the buildings, which in the case of West Kennet Farm is considerable. There is a 16th-century dovecote and an attractive 17th-century farmhouse; an 18th-century carriage shed and a huge complex of timber and thatched early 18th- and early 19th-century barns; a timber-framed and steddled granary; and two later 19th-century breweries, one of which was almost a ready-made industrial
museum.
  The County Archaeologist advised that more needed to be known of the archaeology of the site. Accordingly, Marlborough Homes commissioned trial excavations by the Trust for Wessex Archaeology, which were completed in February 1989 by Roland Smith and Martin Trott. Thanks to Whittle's excavations in 1987, it was known that a large prehistoric enclosure butted against the River Kennett on its south bank. Did this enclosure continue the other side of the stream, under West Kennet Farm? Within a month, Marlborough Homes received a lucid report from the TWA, explaining that the hotel, if built, would be sited on undisturbed archaeological deposits. The most important feature identified was, indeed, the other half of the ancient enclosure. Marlborough Homes wanted to build their luxury hotel, function rooms for 200 people, restaurant, coffee lounge and two bars, sporting facilities (including gymnasium and swimming pool), staff accommodation and parking for 190 cars, rumoured to cost more than E4 million on top of a newlydiscovered and hugely important component of the prehistoric complex of Avebury.
  Battle lines were re-drawn. Protests accumulated in Council files, local papers throbbed with anguished letters. At the Enquiry, two of the main parties — Kennet District Council, who were unanimously in favour of the proposals, and 'Avebury In Danger' (the less-fortunately named successor to 'Save Our Skyline') — were represented by former Planning Directors of the same Council: David Stewart, for, and George McDonic, against. That the District Council were in favour came as little surprise. It was said that Marlborough Homes' original intention, to convert the Farm into houses, had been changed when the Council 's Tourism Officer suggested they try for a hotel. Kennet's belief in the need for a hotel in the area had been extensively demonstrated at the earlier Enquiry.
  The Council felt that the proposals 'struck the right balance between preserving and enhancing the buildings, monuments and landscape setting while providing the commercial element needed to restore the site'. Mr Stewart referred to three central government circulars whose joint message underlay the Council's philosophy. Planning authorities had been encouraged to 'adapt a more positive attitude to planning applications' (22/1980); 'development plans are therefore one, and only one, of the material considerations that must be taken into account in dealing' with such applications (14/1985); and 'conservation means breathing new life into buildings' (8/1987). 'Avebury In Danger', under the energetic leadership of Heather Brothwell, had raised E3500 for their representative by means such as a bring-andbuy sale in the village hall and a postal appeal. Mr McDonic argued that a large hotel was just what Avebury did not need. It would attract yet more people to a fragile historic environment, threatening the very character of a location that still retained enough riches to merit World Heritage status.
  Marlborough Homes concentrated on aspects they had sensed would concern a wide community. Mr Stewart was able to report that 'substantial progress' had been made towards the incorporation of a walkers' hostel, in the brewery buildings, and a research and study centre for archaeologists in the relocated carriage shed. Andrew Lawson, director of the TWA, explained that the developers had revised their plans as a direct result of the archaeological investigations. Indeed, the discovery of the palisaded enclosure was greeted at the time with enthusiasm by Marlborough Homes: they were proud to have been the instigators of this historic find.
  English Heritage had Scheduled the palisade trench (not the area enclosed), and were ready to recommend the Monument Consent applications for approval. For construction of the hotel complex would only go ahead with a scheme worked out with archaeologists. The Scheduled Ancient Monument would be covered by sand under a bridge, and all floorlevels, drains and roads would be raised above archaeological deposits. Ground disturbance adjacent to the SAM would be supervised by the Wessex Trust, and any desired excavation would be allowed. Finds would go to the appropriate museum (assumed to be that in Devizes), a report published, and the course of the enclosure marked by signs and sarsen cobbles in the car-park. All this would 'safeguard important remains, [and would] interpret and display the newly discovered palisaded site, while restoring the traditional farmhouse and listed barn'.
The King
I remember my first meeting with Kenneth King, inside the Manor's newly-restored Elizabethan pigeon-house (the pigeons had left, perhaps finding the audio-visuals not to their taste). He was bemoaning the interference in his affairs of another recently-arrived villager, broadcaster and writer Ludovic Kennedy. 'Bloody man, sits up on TV saying there's no history in this place: doesn't know what he's bloody talking about. Six kings and bloody queens stayed here. ' There is in fact a tradition (first written down in 1712) that Queen Anne stayed overnight in the House. A hitherto unrecorded story tells of two other royal visits. A new notice-board beside a horsemounting block reads: 'It is said . . that Charles the first and Charles the second used this mounting stone when visiting Sir John Staywells [sic] home at Avebury Manor. ' Which just goes to show that you cannot trust everything you hear said: the stone is probably 18th century. The only 'king' known to have slept there is the present incumbent.
  Since Ken King and Gillian Mitchell bought Avebury Manor House in July 1988, tales like this have littered magazines and newspapers, and been common fodder for television and radio, both local and national. Mr King's style is altogether different from that of his predecessors in the Avebury planning game. He thrives on gossip journalism, knowing two things: there is only good publicity, not bad; and a racy story can frequently be relied on to be more appealing than the truth.
  The ingredients of this true tale are similar to those behind the two other planning enquiries — a run-down property out of the public eye, and a developer with a new vision. The course of events, however, is more involved. And the lessons for archaeology are tough.
  Plans for the development of the Manor were revealed at the end of October 1988. The hopedfor 70,000 visitors (seven times the previous high) would be greeted by staff in period costume, and could then view 'genuine Royalist armour from the Tower of London', falconry displays, 'strolling players, lords and ladies, minstrels and jesters', 'instruments of torture' and waxwork figures of previous Manor owners (posed in period settings to taped commentaries). As the season progressed, other features of 'The Elizabethan Experience' were advertised, from 'the haunted cavalier bed chamber' to Tudor archery and fire-eaters. In addition to all this, there was to be a garden centre, nature trail, adventure playground, restaurant and tea-rooms, gift shops and a car-park, and a programme of special events — including a vintage-car rally and an Easter-egg hunt. It is interesting to note at the outset that, despite all the protests, Mr King seems to have carried out his entire programme to the letter; and now, March 1990, he has just announced his plans for his second season. In 1989 he did, in fact, fail in one instance that may turn out to be very significant: his attendance figures were a fraction of his published aim.
  The experienced builder from St Albans soon came to blows with the District Council. In November 1988, Kennet ordered a halt on all construction activity, and throughout November and December refused planning consent for a series of applications submitted after the respective works had begun. Mr King admitted (Wiltshire Gazette 17 November 1988) 'he jumped the gun by starting some building work without checking on whether council permission ',vas needed'. At a Parish Council meeting, he was duly apologetic. 'I stand back and accept that in my enthusiasm I may have overstepped the mark.' Quit.e how far he stepped in one direction was revealed to a BBC2 television audience in May 1989, in a superb depiction of some of the issues ('Enterprise Culture', produced by Peter Symes). His restaurant was to be in a restored racquet court, which had been built in imitation of the Manor's 18th-century coachhouse. The chairman of the Parish Council, Miss Elizabeth Hunter, found him 'inspirational and impatient. Unfortunately his restoration resulted in the original building falling down.' The restaurant story did not end there, however. It was forced to open for the first few days without its alcoholic drinks licence, because Kennet District Council objected that Mr King had received no building regulations permit: this was another 'oversight' (Wiltshire Gazette, 23 March 1989).
  The grounds opened to the public on Good Friday, 24 March, 1989. There was an official opening on the Whitsun bank-holiday weekend (28 May), at which two villagers who had shown wide public support for his aims cut the ceremonial ribbon. And, as promised, the season ended on 8 October.
  These six-and-a-half months saw a quite unprecedented amount of political activity in and around Avebury. Peter de Savary, flamboyant owner of Littlecote House on the border of Wiltshire and Berkshire, unsuccessfully attempted to sue Mr King over his alleged copying of Littlecote's publicity literature and events programme. 'Avebury In Danger' met with increasing frequency, first under founder chairman, former diplomat Sir Wynn Hugh Jones (a further new villager), then Heather Brothwell. Kennet issued a continuing barrage of planning notices: in a letter to the Wiltshire Gazette in June, Mrs Brothwell referred to 24 Enforcement and two Listed Building Enforcement Notices, 76 Informations for breaches of building regulations and one Information for an incorrect reply to a requisition for information. On 27 July 1989, Mr King was fined E21,OOO, with EIOOO costs, on 20 of these breaches.
  It was also a season of unprecedented publicity as the media teased out stories. Mr Kennedy opened an article in the Telegraph Weekend Magazine (24 June) with the words, 'As you may have heard, there is a long running battle going on here [Avebury] between the 100-odd residents and the new owner of the manor. . . . ' Who, one was tempted to ask, could possibly not have heard? Not all the publicity was free, however. Mr
King's advertisements in one local newspaper alone undoubtedly outdid, in column inches, the entire promotional efforts of every Avebury entrepreneur, public and private, that came before him.
  The Public Enquiry into Mr King's appeals against the Enforcement Notices (by then 27) opened on September 13; it closed, after an adjournment at the request of his barrister, Clive Newberry, towards the end of November. On this occasion, Mr King had opted to keep in the background, being represented, it was said, by E100,000-worth of specialist and legal help. The self-styled 'Jack-the-lad' could be seen in the Enquiry audience punching the air at apparent points scored in his favour. The image of a boxing-match is not inappropriate. The issues had divided the village, and provoked considerable bitterness.
  At the Enquiry, Mr Newberry argued for precedents for everything his client had done in Avebury, with particular reference to Littlecote House — like Avebury Manor, a Grade 1 Listed Building in an AONB (thus putting a new angle on Mr de Savary's complaints of his rival's plagiarism). Everything from a tankful of tropical fish in the hall, to Young Conservative meetings, was brought up from the past to argue that there had long been a tradition of public activities in Avebury Manor itself. Avebury's World Heritage Site status could be seen as no more than an accolade: the government itself had said that no further protective legislation was called for by this assignation. As for the archaeological damage done, and the deplorable breaks of planning law, these had to be ignored in judging the merits ofthe case. It was the current state of the property that was significant.
  The District Council's case was that Mr King's changes at the Manor added up to more than a list of structural alterations and minor changes of use. Rather, the house was no longer a private home with ancillary use as a country house .open to the public: it was now a 'mixed use' property, a combined residence and themepark. The Council were also concerned about the future of the whole 22 acres of the Manor grounds. As the saying goes, we await the outcome with interest.
  What I wish to draw attention to now, are certain remarkable features of the way this story ran. They highlight a situation about which the archaeological profession should, in my opinion, be seriously concerned.
  In the course of his alterations at the Manor, there can be little doubt that Mr King perpetrated significant archaeological damage. There was earth-moving activity in an area that could have been expected to reveal much-needed information on both the history of the Manor and an earlier Benedictine priory, about which very little is known. John Evans' excavations elsewhere around Avebury further suggest that important prehistoric deposits could have been destroyed.
  Within the Manor gardens, a substantial relandscaping — however expertly conducted will have erased potential traces of Elizabethan and other layouts. All work was conducted without archaeological supervision.
  Such wanton destruction is bad enough. At least as worrying, however, is the failure of archaeologists to attract media attention to these things. In the battle for public sympathy, Mr King won hands down. He was portrayed as the innocent, if brash and perhaps over-eager, victim of meddlesome outsiders and local government bureaucracy. Here was the downto-earth entrepreneur, bringing much-needed jobs and a packet of money to a crumbling house, forced to do battle with élitist new arrivals and archaeologists seeking to fossilize a village and its community.
  As an angle, it made enduring copy. Councillors and tourists wrote to local papers praising his achievements. And the village believed it, too. The support Mr King received from some of Avebury's older occupants was clearly partially founded on distant resentment of authority and archaeology. In this social drama, as Thatcherite free-will challenged the old order of restraint and interference, some important issues got lost. What of the archaeological damage? the flagrant distortion of history in the house's presentation? the annihilation of planning laws? One additional line alone had a little airing, thanks largely to the efforts of 'Avebury In Danger'. If there was divided opinion on Mr King's methods and motives, there was certainly no doubting his determination to bring more people to Avebury. Observers could see that ever-increasing visitors would soon pay their toll in a reduced quality of environment, for both resident and tourist.
  The questions remain, what should archaeologists have done, or be doing, in the face of a putative threat at a very well-known archaeological monument? It seems to me that both the issues and the practical implications (i.e. the possibility of irretrievable physical damage) are serious, the more so for being so much in the public eye. As such, it seems wrong that the burden of research and subsequent pronouncement, of rallying professional interest and supand, indeed, of raising the necessary funds to do so lay with a local protest group.
  The media found in favour of King, against antiquarians. But how just a verdict is this? How much has Mr King really been hindered by archaeologists? Is he as ignorant as he seems when it comes to the minefield of planning law and process? BBC2 viewers may have wondered when he was seen in his grounds the day before a formal District Council visit. He explained to the camera that he had been forced to postpone  not cancel — the erection of an avenue of tall flagpoles: he thought the councillors might not like them. He was right. They didn't.
  Then there are his claims to be saving, out of the goodness of his heart, a historic property abandoned by the world. As Marlborough magistrates were told recently, when he was fined E700 with E200 costs for demolishing a pair of gates without listed building consent, 'Mr King's prime concern is preservation' (Wiltshire Gazette, 25 January 1990). To the many businesses who have had to resort to legal action to obtain money owed to them, Mr King's boasts of public-spirited spending on an endangered property have a hollow ring.
  We live in a media-driven world, and if archaeology is to survive at all, it must fight and grow. Archaeologists — not necessarily every individual, but certainly the collective profession — must be able to talk politics as well as potsherds. And whichever it be, they must catch the imagination. The competition is very strong.
So what have we got?
In the course of each of the three Public Enquiries, extensive submissions were made by archaeologists, both as individuals and corporately. In amongst the honourable and well-prepared statements, there was all too frequently an air of unreality. Where is this archaeological wonder devoid of road traffic, free of all the trappings of tourism, and spared even the tiniest slip of insensitive building? It is ironic that a profession whose very lifeblood is historical change, should, in imagination, be capable of fossilizing a landscape as if nothing ever changed at all.
  I hope I have shown how Avebury is changing. This is nothing new. William Stukeley complained bitterly of the destruction of megaliths in the 18th century — yet this destruction made possible some of the walls and houses that are now so avidly protected. Paul Nash, landscape painter, was distressed when Keiller's campaign of clearance and restoration damaged the wild mystery that was, for him, part of the essence of Avebury's magic. Today, Keiller's Avebury itself seems a remote haven of solitude.
  Some archaeologists have spoken with horror of the 'commercialization' of Avebury. The real threat is just people. People who bring with them noise, pollution, erosion — and demands for services, whether it be litter-bins, toilets or souvenir shops. It is true, advertising can bring in visitors, but there are many other factors. One of these is the wide interest in things archaeological — for which archaeologists themselves can take less 'credit' than the media in general. More broadly, the love of the countryside and 'heritage' brings more and more out from towns, as the population grows and, with the growth, the individual's ability to move about.
  Huge quantities of visitors now come to Avebury, and there is every reason to think the numbers are growing. Not all past planning decisions were necessarily the right ones, and a wide range of options is still open for future policies. If we are to protect and preserve, we have to recognize the continuous process of change. Else we seek to retain the extinct and be extinguished by the present.
What might we get?
A great deal of Avebury's future, of course, lies in the results of the two incomplete planning Enquiries. But leaving these aside, it is still possible to imagine an Avebury to come that is a mere parody of the present. There was a time when Avebury was in the hands of a few rural Wiltshire communities. It is increasingly affected not just by national trends, but by panEuropean ones. And very soon its story will roll on in a world theatre.
  Locally, as David Stewart pointed out in his West Kennet Farm address, there is growing development pressure. Avebury is in an attractive landscape area; people are prepared to commute over greater distances than before; there is more money available for housing and more time for leisure; and, acting from the other direction, agricultural surpluses reduce the push to use the countryside for growing food.
  There is also a frighteningly powerful growth in tourism. It is natural that the more go-ahead local authorities should seek to capitalize on the trend. Kennet District has an ambitious Tourism Development Manager. A promotional paper, Freetime UK, last summer carried an advertisement from Kennet with an Avebury megalith in its logo. In it only four places were treated to editorial colour photography: Buckingham Palace, Bath, Old Trafford (promoted as the home of Manchester United football team) . . and Avebury.
  But tourism is not just a national phenomenon. 1990 is European Year of Tourism. The Channel Tunnel bores on. Britain, particularly the south, is soon to receive visitors from Europe who have previously been kept away by the water crossing, or by a British insularity that must surely be eroded in years to come. Nor, as world change continues apace, need the market stop there. Avebury is already experiencing a growing international character to its tourism (no-one living here would be surprised to learn that 1989 was the third consecutive record year for visitors to the UK). This must surely continue, as new countries develop their economies and, with them, the life-style aspirations of their citizens.
  Avebury cannot now accommodate its visitors at the height of the season. What of the future? Will roads be 'dualled'? Where will more car-parks go? If the West Kennet Farm hotel is built, will it alone suffice for the demand? And if not, where will the next one be? How long do we have to wait for other sites, perhaps not as decaying as the Ridgeway Cafe, but nonetheless largely overlooked, to be developed? What, for example, of The Red Lion Inn, dead centre of the stone circle itself, and owned by a major brewery? Or The Waggon and Horses Inn at Beckhampton? Wadworths, the owners of this pub, were recently refused consent for an expansion programme: they envisaged a larger bar area, with new car-park, access road, manager's flat and guest-rooms, and a courtyard lounge with a water-wheel. But who is to tell what central government planning circulars may lie in store, encouraging a yet more 'positive attitude to planning applications'? The events in Avebury over the past two years were quite unimaginable only ten years ago. A good example of the unimaginable appeared while this paper was at proof stage. Ridge Aggregates have published proposals to extract high-grade sand at a 75-acre site at Compton Bassett (7 km northwest of Avebury). If approved, this development could, according to the company's figures, result in 240 of their lorries passing through the stone circle every day.
  All in all, it is difficult to avoid the conclusion that, if left to themselves, developments will head Avebury down the Stonehenge pathway. Increasing erosion to the monuments will lead to them being fenced off, perhaps with restricted access for those prepared to pay (at the moment, like the National Gallery, Avebury is free). The West Kennet Long Barrow, already the butt of occasional mild vandalism, could be closed completely. As more and more come to experience Avebury, that elusive quality they seek — a sense of time and of peace, of mystery and belonging — will inexorably vanish. And, as time continues to pass, people will come to forget what they are missing anyway.
Then what do we want?
In the present context, of course, 'we' means archaeologists. What, as a profession, would we like Avebury to be? Or more specifically, for what can we realistically strive? I would suggest that the only way archaeologists can hope to have a favourable impact on the course of change, is by becoming part of that change. We must stop standing dozily on the edge of the pitch, complaining when our opponents score a goal — and then returning to sleep. We must get into the game, and defend the goal: or better still, fight to score ourselves.
  First there is Avebury as Avebury: what_do we want the visitor to see, and what to remember of their experience? But then there is also Avebury as flagship. What people see in Avebury tells them what archaeologists do. Furthermore, it can stimulate their interest and understanding as a whole. Greater awareness of archaeology, its goals and its achievements can only lead to support for better funding of preservation and research. The key concept is education. Contemporary public ignorance of the rich yet fragile nature of our ancient heritage is staggering. Avebury, and similar locations with a long and intense tradition of tourism, can be used to inform; and by informing, to enhance the future of the whole landscape.
  It is time to be positive. Not just to attack each and every planning proposal, but to put them forward ourselves. Play the radical developer. Bring in landscape artists, hold architectural competitions. There are too many people in the village already. So do something to attract them away. Plan a visitor centre outside Avebury that will not only inform and entertain, but will spread the visitor load.
References
BURL, A. 1979. Prehistoric Avebury. London: Yale University Press.
CUNNINGTON, M.E. 1931. The 'Sanctuary' on Overton Hill, near Avebury, Wiltshire Archaeological Magazine 45: 300—35.
EVANS, J.G. 1972. Land snails in archaeology. London: Seminar Press.
EVANS, J.C., M.W. PITTS & D. WILLIAMS. 1985. An excavation at Avebury 1982, Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society 51: 305—10.
GRAY, H.ST G. 1935. The Avebury excavations 1908— 1922, Archaeologia 84: 99—162.
HOLGATE, R. 1987. Neolithic settlement patterns at Avebury, Wiltshire, Antiquity 61: 259—63.
NATIONAL TRUST. 1976. Avebury Study. Privately published.
  Peter Drewett, of the London Institute of Archaeology, made a brave statement at the Ridgeway Cafe Enquiry. 'We must show the world,' he said, 'that we can still develop, interpret and service our monuments . . without sacrificing the monument itself.' It is a balancing trick, no doubt. But what rewards lie in store! And what an advance to attempt such a trick would be, when too many of us are content to let the world sacrifice the monument while we show each other the entrails.
PIGGOTT, S. 1950. William Stukeley: an 18th century Antiquary. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
1962. The West Kennet Long Barrow. London: HMSO.
ROYAL INSTITUTE OF BRITISH ARCHITECTS. 1974. Outline proposals of the Wiltshire Branch of the RIBAfor the protection, improvement and enhancement of the Avebury stone circles. Privately published.
SMITH, I.F. 1965. Windmill Hill and Avebury. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
SMITH, R. W. 1984. The ecology of neolithic farming systems as exemplified by the Avebury region of Wiltshire, Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society 50: 99-120.

  

  

  
260	MICHAEL PITTS
  
260	MICHAEL PITTS
  
260	MICHAEL PITTS
  
	260	MICHAEL PITTS
  
	WHAT FUTURE FOR AVEBURY?	261
  
	WHAT FUTURE FOR AVEBURY?	261
  
	WHAT FUTURE FOR AVEBURY?	261
  
	WHAT FUTURE FOR AVEBURY?	261
  
	WHAT FUTURE FOR AVEBURY?	261
  
260	MICHAEL PITTS
  
	WHAT FUTURE FOR AVEBURY?	261
  
260	MICHAEL PITTS
  
