REVIEW	431
  
Coneybury must form an important new development. Again with hindsight, it is all too easy to express the disappointment inevitably felt at the use of a sampling policy which denies us a full view of the internal timber structures at Coneybury. These internal structures are, perhaps, a single or a succession of, architectural entities. To expose a random part of this cannot be justified on grounds of cost (the on-cost of total excavation of the interior of such a small monument would have been minimal) nor on the 'next generation' argument (the site has been very heavily ploughed and, I gather, has continued to be). It would seem doctrinaire to insist upon 'sampling' in such an instauce where the result is the denial, for the foreseeable future, of the plan of this monument. Field-sampling is a strategy to allow the location of archaeological foci, not a means for the sensible analysis of those foci once located — unless, of course, their nature (e.g. in the case of middens) is an apparently random one. Sampling a non-random construction offers little to the on-looker — better not to touch it at all.
  In the late Bronze Age the sampling of linear ditch systems on Wilsford Down offers some very interesting insights into land-use development which culminated in an extraordinarily rich depiction of local landscape development up to the Iron Age (see figure 155).
This series of reports	the English Heritage Archaeological Reports — of which this represents the 16th has been no mean achievement in English Heritage's seven years of existence and Dr Stephen Johnston deserves much credit for having so effectively guided the series in to what is clearly now a well-established and highly successful mode.
                              ROGER MERCER Royal Commission on the Ancient and Historical Monuments of Scotland, Edinburgh
Reference
RCHM(E). 1979. Stonehenge and its environs. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.

CHRISTOPHER CHIPPINDALE, PAUL DEVEREUX, PETER FOWLER, RHYS JONES & TIM SEBASTIAN. Who owns Stonehenge? 176 pages. 1990. London: Batsford; ISBN 0-7134-6455-0 €12.99.
Poor Stonehenge! For such an important monument — unique not only in Britain but in Europe — Stonehenge has not received the sympathetic treatment it so richly deserves. The efforts of successive generations to improve its condition and presentation have mostly failed. The extensive excavations undertaken intermittently throughout this century remain largely unpublished — a blot on the cultural record of this
  
ARCHAEOMETRY
The prime research journal for the archaeologist interested in the involvement of the physical sciences in archaeology and art history. Articles are written with the non-specialist in mind while Research Notes provide state-of-the-art specialist reports.
The February 1991 issue includes: English porcelains ... Principal component analyses of glass compositions ... Dating time-since-death of oyster shells ... Distinguishing European trade copper and north-eastern North American native copper ... The structure of oriental lacquer by nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy ... Detection of cadmium in gold/silver alloys ...
Proto-Campanian and A-Campanian ceramics ... Thermal archaeological surveying . Radiocarbon dates from the Oxford AMS system ...
Subscription price volume 33: €22 in Europe & US$ 55 elsewhere; personal prices €16 & $38. Payment by cheque or credit card (Visa, Access, Master, Euro, Amex).
432	REVIEW
  
country that must surely be removed before long, and it has become the focus for a variety of perceptions about the stones themselves, ranging from crackpot astronomical and glacial theories on the one hand to the measured conclusion of modern science that the monument itself cannot be viewed in isolation from its surroundings, but must be perceived as part of a continuously evolving landscape; as the product of societies that declined and rose again in response to social and economic pressures. The title of this book poses the question, Who owns Stonehenge? It belongs, of course, to all of us, and the rich and abundant perceptions contribute to its unique place in Britain's cultural heritage. We all have a right to our associations with it and the five authors have taken the opportunity of expressing their diverse attitudes — as well as interpreting those of others — In  an attractive and entertaining book. They all have something that is new and interesting to say on a subject that one might fairly have considered to have been exhausted.
  From Chippindale we get an erudite contribution on the history of thought and perceptions regarding Stonehenge — a subject that he has made particularly his own. For Devereux, Stonehenge is a geomantic centre for earth divination originally related to a form of fortune-telling. Peter Fowler takes a more socially aware view of Stonehenge as a symbol of contemporary society that has now become part of the cycle of the English summer along with Wimbledon and Henley. He deals very fairly with the claims of all sides, from those who claim ownership through legal title or religious right, or those who have a genuine concern that such a precious part of our heritage should not be misused. Rhys Jones sets out the British Aboriginals' claim to Stonehenge and Tim Sebastian argues for recognition of the monument as the temple of the nation, with all that this implies.
  Throughout the book the question of freedoms and ownership constantly arises. The rights of future generations to their own views of the monument and its meaning to them must be respected, and it clearly cannot survive as a rural slum for an indefinite future. The value of this book is that it sets out these issues for us in an entertaining and informative way at a time when new plans are proposed for the better management and presentation of Stonehenge and its environs. Stonehenge belongs to all of us and we should make our voices heard in the process of consultation.
  The book helps us to understand that the onus of securing Stonehenge landscape for future generations lies not solely with the managers of that estate, but with all of us.
G.J. WAINWRIGHT English Heritage

MARTIN BIDDLE (with contributions by IAN GOODALL, DAVID HINTON & 81 OTHERS). Object and economy in medieval Winchester. 2 volumes. (Winchester Stu„ dies 7ii: artefacts from medieval Winchester). cx + 1271 pages, 387 figures, 103 tables, 65 plates. 1990. Oxford: Oxford University Press; ISBN 0-19-8131755 hardback E200.
This, the fourth title to be published in the Winchester Studies series, presents some 6600 material culture items, mostly non-ceramic, from 15 sites in Winchester excavated between 1961 and 1971. Numismatic finds, to which a separate volume will be devoted, are excluded. So too are stone sculpture and architectural fragments and Anglo-Saxon coffin fittings, which will be published with the sites from which they come. Crucibles and pottery lamps are included with other evidence for metalworking and lighting; all other ceramics will appear in a further volume. There are detailed catalogue entries for 4457 objects, and over half of these are illustrated. Finds not fully catalogued are listed with full details of provenance. The date of final deposition of finds ranges from the 6th to the 20th century, the great majority from stratigraphic contexts of the 10th to 16th centuries.
  There are three main sections. Part I covers object classification and organization of the report; recovery, conservation and processing of the finds; the respective importance of the assemblages of iron objects and copper-alloy, silver and gold artefacts; and a general analysis of patterning by site type and chronological trends. Excavation and postexcavation, and in particular the concepts of stratigraphy and phasing adopted, are discussed rigorously and in detail. These were pioneering campaigns of urban excavation on a large scale, as the hommage to Wheeler and Kenyon reminds us, and this discussion therefore has a historical importance as well as a more general methodological interest. This is also true of the results of the analyses by site type which, while they quantify and confirm some expected sets of associations between particular site types, artefact categories and materials, are perhaps more important for the lessons to be drawn from less straightforward patterns: the implications for sampling strategy and sample size; the complexity of relationships between material culture and society; and the importance of discard, curation and post-depositional processes.
  Part Il is a discussion of the evidence for fifteen major crafts, industries or technological processes and seven further categories of tools, and includes major scientific analyses. In Part Ill the objects are catalogued in 45 functional categories in six main groups, with a seventh for unidentified objects. Five concordances then list site and phase, find number and material for each catalogued object, and identify imports and religious and devotional objects.
