Woodbury
Two MARVELLOUS AIR—PHOTOGRAPHS by O. G. S. CRAWFORD
    HE plates facing pages 385 and 452 of this number represent the culminating point of archaeological air-photography. They were taken by Pilot Offcer Jonas, R.A.F., between 11 and 12 0'clock on the 16th of May 1929, using a K .2 filter. The sites lie half a mile apart on the hill called Woodbury, less than a mile south of Salisbury Cathedral, between the Blandford and Bournemouth roads. Woodbury is three miles south of the aerodrome at Old Sarum, from which they were taken and where I found them when taking over obsolete negatives on behalf of the Ordnance Survey (where they now are). They were taken during pin-pointing, as part of the ordinary routine of training ; but that these particular sites were selected for practice is due to the keenness of the photographic section at Old Sarum, which has been closely associated with the development of this branch of air-photography from its birth. (It was the Old Sarum section that obtained many of the first archaeological air-photographs ever taken, including those of the Stonehenge Avenue, in 1921, and of the Celtic fields round Winchester, in 1922). Regarded merely as photographs, from a technical standpoint the negatives are as nearly perfect as possible. The wonderful definition of the crop-marks is probably due partly to the use of a K .2 filter, partly to the dry spell during the first half of 1929.
    The larger of the two enclosures (plate opp. this page) is Woodbury, which I discovered in 1924 (Wessex from the Air, plate Vlll, page 80) ; but this is a far better representation of it. Not only does the black band of the surrounding ditch come out very distinctly, but the interior of the camp is seen to be covered with black spots and lines. The black spots are of two kinds, large and small ; the large blobs are doubtless the sites of huts ; they are mostly circular, and some are surrounded by a faint narrow black line, representing possibly a drainage ditch. The small black spots must represent small pits and post-holes, serving doubtless many different purposes. On the western side a rectangular enclosure may be faintly discerned. In the
452
PLATE 11


facing p. 452
WOODBURY
middle of the north side is a large dark blur (corresponding to a shallow depression on the ground). The entrance may have been here, and if so the dark line leading north-eastwards from it across a field of wheat may be a prehistoric hollow track-way—it is in any case plainly contemporary with the camp, where it ends.
    Just outside, on the south-west near the road and between the two ricks, is a beautiful little double circle. It is too small, apparently, for a disc-barrow, and must remain a puzzle till it is excavated—an easy task.
    The larger (central) portion of the interior was under barley when this photograph was taken. The field on the west (where the ditch disappears) was under grass, and that on the east under wheat. Note that barley registers far better than wheat, and grass not at all. The field on the north also contained wheat ; its lighter colour may perhaps be due to later sowing.
    I visited the site on 13 October. There was nothing whatever to be seen except on the western side, where the broad shallow depression of the ditch is plainly visible. Here too the remains of the white chalk rampart can also be seen, though far less plainly than on the photograph. There seems to have been an outer rampart also here, and it is just the place where one would expect it. There were hints of such on the airphotograph I took ; but the western field both then and subsequently (in 1928 when some other R.A.F. photos were taken) has unfortunately been planted with an unsympathetic crop.
    The whole of the interior is covered with pot-boilers, and I found part of the base of a pot of New Forest ware. One would naturally attribute the construction of the camp to the people of the Iron Age, but there is no evidence one way or the other.
    The discovery of Woodbury in 1924 was a pure accident. At the same time I observed, about half a mile to the east, a smaller enclosure with a slighter ditch. It was, however, much less striking, and we did not photograph it. It is merely recorded in Wessex from the Air (pp. 80—1). The magnificent photograph which forms the frontispiece (facing p. 385) of the present number presents it, therefore, as virtually a new discovery. The honours are divided between Old Sarum on the one hand and a crop of barley and oats, starved by drought, on the other. The enclosure itself consists of an irregular, very plainly marked black line, continuous except at a point on the north-east, where a gap, about 62 feet wide, represents the entrance. From near by diverge two curious narrow horns, like the antennae of some giant insect. But the
    
ANTIQUITY
most striking feature of the photograph is the fact that it shows a mass of black spots within the enclosure. These occur nowhere else and are without any doubt the vestiges of permanent habitation. They consist, as before, of a number of small dots and some larger blobs. The latter, however, are here strung loosely together, forming a group. One may reasonably infer that they represent the site of the main group of huts, The absence of pits and hut-depressions outside the enclosure is very striking—more so than on the other photograph, though also to be observed there. This is the first time that air-photography has proved capable of recording by means of crop-marks the presence of these prehistoric hut-sites ; and it shows that, given favourable conditions, we may hope for great things in the future. The bulk of the area of the enclosure, as well as the ' antennae ' and the sites about to be described, was under barley which, on certain soils,* is thus proved to be a better ' developer ' than oats, wheat or grass. We may expect to find similar dots and blobs amongst the many air-photographs stored at the Ordnance Survey, now that we know from this instance that they can be relied upon. Many such settlements may have existed in the open, without a protecting bank and ditch round them.
    A small segment of the enclosure encroaches upon a field of oats on the south. Here the ditch seems wider. It is of irregular width throughout, expanding in places for a short distance ; the two ends at the entrance are also slightly expanded.
    At the time of my visit the whole area was covered with stubble. I could not even see anything on the ground to enable me to identify the site of the enclosure or its contained markings. The farmer whom I met on the spot, with some of the labourers, told me, however, that they knew the ' ring ' well and had regarded it as the relics of some former field-enclosure. They could see it in the spring. The area is covered with pot-boilers.
    Outside, in the NW corner of the plate, is a small four-sided enclosure. The ditch was evidently very narrow, since the black line, though quite distinct, is much fainter. The two eastern angles (of the enclosure) are sharp and the other two are rounded. There is a gap in the north side, and two black spots set close together within the area. South-west of it a smaller rectangle is just discernible ; it is divided into two unequal halves. It suggests some sort of a building. The dark line beyond is an old hollow field-track, still in use and aiming at Britford.

* But not on all ; see ANTIQUITY, 1, 469 (The big circles near Dorchester, Oxon.).
WOODBURY
    I have not, in the above brief account, exhausted the many points of interest revealed by these remarkable photographs. (I have not, for instance, said much about the wandering lines that can be seen ; one of them runs directly from Woodbury to the smaller enclosure). They are valuable not only in themselves but for what they foretell. They are the heralds of innumerable queer resurrections. They assure us that no site, however flattened out, is really lost to knowledge. Scotsmen in particular will welcome their message ; for certain lowland regions, such as the Vale of Strathmore and the coastal plain near Edinburgh, where oats and barley predominate, are admirably suited to this method. Not only will many of General Roy's Roman camps come back to life, but others doubtless will be discovered, particularly along the line of the known Roman roads. One can imagine no more fascinating pursuit for the owner of a private aeroplane.

    
453
    

    
453
    
453
    
453
    
