A year at Stonehenge
Mike Pitts?
You didn’t need to be an archaeologist in 2008 to know that things were happening at Stonehenge. For years controversial plans to improve the Stonehenge environs (costed at £600m) had dominated media and much academic debate, but in November 2007 the British government announced that it couldn’t afford them (Pitts 2008a). The plans were dropped (much cheaper changes are now being implemented to make Stonehenge look nice for the 2012 Olympics: English Heritage 2008). There are new broadcasts and press stories featuring the stones every year, but 2008 was different. As road protests diminished, real archaeologists took the stage.
  Real archaeology happened, too. With two television films, cover stories in National Geographic and The Smithsonian magazines, web blogs and widespread media reports, it was difficult to escape the fact that Stonehenge and its surrounding World Heritage site were being subjected to new excavations: but for many – even at times for those actually engaged in some of the work – exactly what was being done, and why, were harder to discern.
  What happened? Was the fieldwork of high quality and research-integrated, or pandering to the media? Should there be more, or less excavation at such an iconic ancient site? 2008 at Stonehenge was also about how archaeology and the media interact, and other issues of public engagement and curatorial management. How are we doing?
Timewatch 1
Archaeologists dug, but others led. The two major players in this story were the BBC, with their BBC2/Open University history documentary series Timewatch, and the National Geographic Society. The first project, funded by the BBC with Smithsonian Networks, was a small excavation near the centre of the monument. Here Timothy Darvill (professor of archaeology at Bournemouth University, responsible for the Stonehenge World Heritage site research framework: Darvill et al. 2005) and Geoffrey Wainwright (president of the Society of Antiquaries of London, and pioneer excavator at nearby Durrington Walls in the 1960s: Wainwright & Longworth 1971) directed the excavation of a 3.5m × 2.5m trench (Figure 1). It was sited between the sarsen circle and the ring of bluestones it encloses, where an earlier bluestone structure once stood in what are known as the Q and R holes. (There are two broad classes of megalith at Stonehenge: the larger stones carved from sarsen, the hard sandstone whose source almost certainly lay between Stonehenge and the Marlborough Downs 30km to the north; and the smaller bluestones, a variety of rocks whose sources have mostly been pinpointed to locations 250km away in south-west Wales.)
  Darvill and Wainwright sought to date the first arrival of bluestones at Stonehenge, an event then thought from circumstantial evidence to have occurred around 2600 BC. They argued that these stones, transported from Wales, were crucial to understanding Stonehenge,
?	11 Silverless Street, Marlborough, SN8 1JQ, UK
ANTIQUITY 83 (2009): 184–194

Figure 1. Excavation designed to date the bluestone circle at Stonehenge in 2008, directed by Tim Darvill (left) and Geoffrey Wainwright (centre). They used a radiocarbon date to argue for the arrival of bluestones at Stonehenge in 2300 BC, and also found evidence for Roman use of the monument. All photographs by Mike Pitts.
dismissing the theory that the bluestones had reached the area in glaciers long before (Thorpe et al. 1991).
  In 2001 they had begun a field survey of suspected quarry areas on Carn Meini in the Preseli Hills (Darvill & Wainwright 2008). They consistently refer to the ‘spotted dolerite’ from Meini as the sole Stonehenge bluestone, although a detailed mineralogical survey had proposed 10 localised sources for bluestones, not all of them dolerite, and recognised that two more lay beyond the Preselis (Thorpe et al. 1991). Other shorthand devices Darvill and Wainwright employ include referring to the Q and R holes as footings for ‘the double bluestone circle’, when indications are that this arrangement, while undetermined in detail, was not of that form (contrast Cleal et al. 1995: 169-83 and Darvill 2006: 119-24).
  Claims that ‘discarded pillar-stones’ on the slopes of Carn Meini have anything to do with Stonehenge (or are even prehistoric) have yet to be substantiated, but as with much else, we await full publication of the evidence. This applies particularly to claims that prehistoric carvings embellish springs on Carn Meini, and that human remains buried around Stonehenge show an unusual degree of injury or disease – both used to support a case that the bluestones were taken to Stonehenge because of their believed healing properties. This is an idea derived from a medieval story; an additional theory that the larger stones represented paired gods was not aired in 2008 (Darvill 2006: 141-6).
  The excavation had received the blessing of Druids before it began and was well covered by the press, a Timewatch camera crew, a Smithsonian daily blogger and a live camera feed

Figure 2. The public could view the Darvill-Wainwright excavation on a live video feed inside a tent beside the Stonehenge car park. Additional film clips included English Heritage director Simon Thurley proclaiming the dig’s significance from a screen surrounded by photos of the stones, a BBC Timewatch identity card, electric fan heaters and a polystyrene megalith.
to a tent erected in the public car park (Figure 2). ‘The quest is now on’, wrote Simon Mackie in his Timewatch blog two days before the end of the dig, ‘to find organic material from the stone holes that can be used to date when the bluestones were set’ (BBC 2008). There was soon talk of suitable samples having been found, but what those were we would have to wait until September to find out. Meanwhile a different sponsor was preparing its own offensive.
National Geographic
The other excavation was quite different (Figure 3). Perhaps the largest university-based archaeological field programme ever seen in Britain, the Stonehenge Riverside Project (SRP) began in 2003 and culminated in 2008 with a typically ambitious season (future work will involve surface survey and possibly minor excavation only). Its directors, Mike Parker Pearson (the driven, confident leader from Sheffield University, excited by ideas more than artefacts and welcoming both other researchers into the team and the visiting public to the sites), Joshua Pollard (Bristol University), Colin Richards and Julian Thomas (Manchester University), Christopher Tilley (UCL) and Kate Welham (Bournemouth University), each have their own interests. The different universities and sponsors also spin their own publicity. The sheer scale of the excavations continues to unleash a wealth of new data to archaeologists

Figure 3. A typical Stonehenge Riverside Project dig within the World Heritage site in 2008, which addressed problems relating to an early Neolithic burial mound at the east end of the cursus earthwork, retrieved good radiocarbon samples and located some unexpected Neolithic pits. In standing group, M. Parker Pearson is in the red shirt, and site director Julian Thomas is on the right.
accustomed to squeezing scraps from small, often poorly-recorded projects that took place in the last century – or earlier.
  The project’s size had its advantages. Encouraged to visit, other archaeologists could be assured of plenty to see. Many came, contributing to intellectual debate and on-site interpretation as excavation progressed and, sometimes, questioning what they saw in trenches worked by students gaining field experience. All this was curatorially overseen by English Heritage, but face to face peer review in the field is also a powerful form of quality control. Excavators who have sought to understand the work of their predecessors are aware of the extent to which future archaeologists will pore over their archive. Archaeologists will be unforgiving of flaws in the final publications.
  The National Geographic Society (NG) was not the SRP’s largest sponsor (the UK Arts and Humanities Research Council can lay claim to that), but it was the only one demanding exclusive rights. This threw interesting light on the ways of the media. Excavation trenches were scattered over the northern half of the World Heritage site, often visually isolated from each other. Determined journalists and bloggers could find themselves almost accidentally publishing new discoveries far in advance of media events launched by one of the world’s most highly-resourced and experienced operators.
  This information, of course, was not always sound, and often apparently collected from people who knew no more than the journalists (a particularly prolific blogger is Dennis Price, at http://www.eternalidol.com). Yet notwithstanding that much data were already circulating, it was only when NG launched its embargoed press releases that national and international media took interest. Then for a brief, intense period through a sort of journalistic peer review process, reports on the SRP made headlines around the world, before the relatively reliable data slipped from view and back into the waiting arms of bloggers.
  On 29 May NG put out a story referring for the first time to the radiocarbon dates from cremated human bone described elsewhere in this issue (Parker Pearson et al. 2009). It argued that these dates demonstrated that Stonehenge was for long a ‘domain of the dead’, Parker Pearson’s clear riposte to the rival theory of Darvill and Wainwright that the stones were a place of healing, a ‘prehistoric Lourdes’. The work of both teams featured in the June National Geographic magazine (Alexander 2008), and an ‘exclusive look at the new discoveries’ of the SRP would appear in a ‘global premiere’ on the National Geographic Channel on 1 June.
  The NG film Stonehenge Decoded focused on sarsen stones, with ambitious dramatisation of the monument’s construction: this second difference from Darvill and Wainwright’s approach was emphasised by the apparent absence of bluestones at Stonehenge altogether. Durrington Walls, ‘a city for the living, the largest settlement in northern Europe from this period’,waslinkedtoStonehengebyariverandtwolinearearthworksoravenues.Stonehenge itself was ‘a monument not to ancient gods, but to the dead’ – i.e. the ancestors (Parker Pearson & Ramilisonina 1998).
Back to Stonehenge
The previous years’ excavations, on which the NG film drew heavily, had been mostly at Durrington Walls and nearby. In 2008 the SRP moved closer to the stones, with one small trench actually within the monument, over an Aubrey Hole. Some 50 cremation burials are known to have been found at Stonehenge, but only a few were accessible: most had been reburied in 1935 in Aubrey Hole 7, which had originally been excavated in 1920 (Pitts 2001: xiii, 103). The aim was to recover these bones for study and dating; the work was directed by Parker Pearson, Julian Richards and the author (Figure 4).
  WithintheSRPthiswasaminorexcavation,ifwithsubstantialpost-excavationchallenges. But its location and the known quantities of human remains raised new problems. On the one hand it required a licence from the Ministry of Justice, under the Burial Act 1857. This granted permission to remove ‘the remains of persons unknown’, and obliges the team to rebury them within two years, ‘in a burial ground in which interments may legally take place’ – which of course excludes Stonehenge. This situation arose from an interpretation of the law that the Ministry of Justice is revisiting.
  The excavation was closely watched by Druids and other Pagans, some of whom asked that the remains be reburied, and some that the excavation should be stopped (Figure 5). English Heritage had allowed some Pagans to hold a ceremony at the Aubrey Hole, but the procession was disrupted by other Pagans before it could leave the car park. A noisy standoff ensued, and as the archaeologists tried to explain the excavation’s purpose, one

Figure 4. The Stonehenge Riverside Project re-excavation of Aubrey Hole 7 in 2008, where the cremated remains of around 50 people excavated at the site in the 1920s and reburied in 1935 were successfully recovered. The film crew are working for the US science series, Nova.
Pagan was heard to say, ‘Blood will flow’. Later, one of the archaeologists was asked if they would ‘dig up their granny’, and in a prominent feature in the regional press (written by Arthur Pendragon, ‘senior Druid and prospective independent Parliamentary candidate for Salisbury’), they were called ‘grave robbers’.
  The excavation was completed without incident, maintaining a low public profile once the work was underway (though, naturally, filmed for two different future TV productions), and recovered a large quantity of human remains in excellent condition. The edges of an Aubrey Hole were examined for the first time in nearly 60 years. The circle of 56 pits is a famous but enigmatic part of Stonehenge, whose interpretation has moved from a ring of stones, through a ring of posts, to empty pits and back to posts (Cleal et al. 1995: 94-107). There was now an opportunity to test the theory that the original interpretation was correct.
  Given the pit had already been cleaned out twice before, it could be accepted that Aubrey Hole7hadonceheldastandingstone;inapitofthissize,itcouldonlyhavebeenabluestone. Building on this and records from the 1920s excavations, one could then envisage a ring of 56 bluestones standing around 3000 BC. By this argument, megaliths and cremation burial would have co-existed throughout the major prehistoric phases at Stonehenge (Parker Pearson et al. 2009).
Timewatch 2
Darvill and Wainwright were not expected to support the case for an early bluestone circle, and on 21 September they announced at a Timewatch press event that they had dated the arrival of bluestones at Stonehenge (some 700 years later) to 2300 BC.
  This date, ‘said to be the most accurate yet’, revises the previously accepted 2600 BC. It is incompatible both with other radiocarbon dates, and with stratigraphy from earlier excavations (Cleal et al. 1995; Parker Pearson et al. 2007), but these are issues still to be addressed. ‘We told the world we were going to date Stonehenge’, Darvill told BBC News. ‘That was a risk, but I was always confident’.
 Timewatch: Stonehenge was broadcast on 27 September. Like the NG film, it was visually stunning, but its narrative raisednewquestions.Bymovingbluestones forward to 2300 BC, and thus forcing the stratigraphically later sarsens to an even more recent time, Darvill and Wainwright could argue that cremation burial had ceased when the first stones were erected at Stonehenge; and that the bluestones were contemporary with the Amesbury Archer, the richly-endowed burial of an individual (one of the very few of any date near Stonehenge available for study) who had suffered severe injuries – albeit long before he died. Stonehenge was about healing, not death.
  On 9 October, Darvill and Wainwright made a presentation to the Society of Antiquaries of London. The 2300 BC radiocarbon date seemed to have been derived from one of a large group of samples that risked being either residual
Figure 5. Druid Arthur Pendragon protesting about the	or intrusive. This is a common problem,
Aubrey Hole excavation. given the nature of the samples, which were small particles of burnt material, and the
potentially confusing effects to archaeologists of bioturbation – the movement of small items across stratigraphic units through the action of animals such as earthworms – a phenomenon raised by Richard Atkinson (1957), drawing on research at Stonehenge itself by none other than Charles Darwin. These doubts surfaced on BBC Radio 4’s Material World (16 October) in which both the date and the healing hypothesis were questioned. ‘There is so much excitement about Stonehenge’, presenter Quentin Cooper remarked, astutely asking his archaeological participants ‘Do you have difficulty stopping people going too far with any piece of work you’ve done?’
Public interest
It has been an entertaining year at Stonehenge. Other scientists might envy the spectacle of prominent academics’ theories being debated in public, in this case the meaning of Stonehenge – there has been little like it since the monument was bitterly fought over by Inigo Jones, Walter Charleton, John Webb and Robert Gay in the seventeenth century. But has it been edifying?
  Perhaps Darvill and Wainwright were naive in the extent to which they thought they could determine an archaeological narrative presented by a powerful broadcaster; at the October meeting they seemed to be denying some of the things they had earlier said to the press. But the reality is that explanatory theories about Stonehenge (Parker Pearson’s have also been criticised: Whitley 2002) or the prehistoric past in general can never be proven. Amongst ourselves we understand that, or are complicit in the suspension of criticism, but audience-hungry broadcasters want simple, strong stories, and hardened journalists and cynical bloggers demand that impossible proof.
  We can, though, see a strength in the huge public interest, the willingness of senior archaeologists to engage with it, and the prominent roles given to archaeological data and excavation in addressing Stonehenge’s meaning. It was not so long ago that Richard Atkinson derided speculation about Stonehenge as ‘futile’ (Fowles & Brukoff 1980: 9), an attitude that failed to discourage the kind of conjecture that ignores archaeology altogether. There could be no simpler gauge of the interest in theory-driven excavation than the media coverage of Stonehenge in 2008, dramatically illustrated by Google Trends (Pitts 2008b). Readers can explore this themselves by entering ‘Stonehenge’ (alone, or with other terms) at www.google.com/trends, which creates historic graphs of search intensities. Stonehenge has an annual peak at the midsummer solstice, now an event attracting tens of thousands of visitors overnight. In 2008 this was outdone by three additional peaks, which Google labelled with press notices titled ‘Archaeologists start Stonehenge dig, Kansas City Star, Mar 31’, ‘Study: Stonehenge was a burial site, San Francisco Chronicle, May 29’ and ‘UK experts say Stonehenge was place of healing, OregonLive.com Sep 22’. The dates, of course, coincide with the press events noted above.
Consultation
Within the profession, reactions to what has been happening at Stonehenge are mixed. Amongst British prehistorians, and beyond those working with Darvill and Wainwright, I have found it hard to identify anyone prepared to offer strong support to the healing stones idea or their radiocarbon chronology. The scale and apparent speed at which the SRP has been moving have caused some concern, perhaps more amongst those whose particular knowledge lies elsewhere (a substantial proportion of that small circle constituting British Neolithic or Bronze Age specialists must in some way be involved with the project, and regularly aware of progress). On the other hand, amongst the SRP itself there is a sense that conservation agencies consider excavation something to be curtailed rather than encouraged.
  We expect field projects at high profile archaeological sites to be well considered, and the importance of consultation is recognised, especially when there is no development or other threat. A good example of this occurred at Sutton Hoo, where Antiquity’s editor directed major fieldwork at the famous Anglo-Saxon royal burial ground in Suffolk. Here, the project design, including proposals for both research and management, was prepared in 1983-5 for a research committee, published in 1986 and publicly debated before scheduled monument consent was granted and full excavations began (Carver 2005).
  Consultation at Stonehenge has been substantial, but it has occurred in a different way. The International Council on Monuments and Sites (ICOMOS) suggested in 1993 that research programmes should be included in World Heritage site management plans. The researchstatementforAvebury(inscribedbyUNESCOwithStonehengein1986)isthought to be the first such produced (Chadburn et al. 2001: 1). Stonehenge (Darvill et al. 2005) and Orkney (inscribed in 1999, Downes et al. 2005) followed, and a framework is being drafted for the Bend of the Boyne, Ireland, ascribed World Heritage site status in 1993 (http://heritagecouncil.ie/archaeology/bru na boinne).
  Preparedlocallybyspecialistteamswithextensivepublicconsultation,thesearesubstantial studies about four great prehistoric ritual landscapes, offering what Darvill (2007) has described as ‘a transparent and structured approach to the planning and execution of high quality research’. Styles vary, but for their respective World Heritage sites they summarise the state of knowledge, with extensive bibliographies, review major issues that require attention, and consider how the research might be implemented, with the clear message that this is a desiredoutcome.InaforewordtotheStonehengeresearchframeworkNeilCossons,thethen English Heritage chairman, hoped the publication would ‘kick-start a new era of responsible management combined with important, query-driven investigation’ (Darvill et al. 2005: v).
  When the SRP, and Darvill and Wainwright, applied for scheduled monument consents to excavate at or around Stonehenge, the requests were judged by English Heritage (who administer SMC legalisation on behalf of the UK government’s Department for Culture, Media and Sport) and, where relevant, the National Trust, an independent conservation charity with 3.5m members, which owns much land within the World Heritage site. The research framework was an important document in this assessment, as it was in the preparation of the fieldwork programmes (cf. Young et al. 2008: paragraphs 2.1.10, 2.3.1).
  There is a significant difference between this process and that exemplified at Sutton Hoo. In practice, at the moment of decision about major fieldwork, the burden fell on curatorial staff who, while extremely familiar with Stonehenge, are not archaeological specialists in that particular subject area. According to Parker Pearson (pers. comm.), there was ‘close cooperation between curators, the SRP staff and all other stake-holders, including academics’. But what most of us would regard as public consultation had occurred earlier, in the preparation of the research framework when the issue of excavation was not immediately relevant. This is how it came about that two quite separate excavations took place at Stonehenge in 2008: the consultation for both had in effect occurred before the projects existed. The SRP is noted in the framework (Darvill et al. 2005: 125) and Darvill is its lead editor, but future projects could arise that have no such connections, and would be judged against a consultation in which they played no part. It is a system that has clear merits, but the curatorial responsibility is high, and archaeologists – and the public – might feel a more open and targeted appraisal may become necessary. They might also question the curious situation in 2008, when the only outside people specifically consulted by curators about the excavations at Stonehenge – in private – were representatives of the sometimes unhelpful and uninformed Pagans.
Excavation
This severance of consultation and research design from specific projects (which nonetheless have their own rationales) might be a factor in a new development noted in 2008. Some of the SRP trenches were significantly smaller than had been planned, after restrictions imposed by English Heritage and the National Trust, arguably compromising research intentions. A request for consent to re-excavate a barrow opened by William Stukeley in the seventeenth century was declined – yet we are almost totally dependent on pre-modern investigations for our knowledge of this key category of the Stonehenge landscape, which has one of the largest concentrations of these Bronze Age burial mounds in Europe. There can be no doubt that had Darvill and Wainwright’s trench been larger, their results would have been more useful and understandable. Keyhole sampling can lead too easily to problems of interpretation. What Stonehenge needs is not ever tinier interventions, but excavation – and re-excavation – on a scale appropriate to the questions. Even within the monument, this could mean opening substantial areas.
  This is not an issue unique to Stonehenge. The draft revision of the Stonehenge World Heritage site management plan calls excavation ‘essentially a destructive process’ (Young et al. 2008: 11.4.1), expressing an opinion increasingly held amongst curators. The idea that at some future date subsurface detection will be so sophisticated that excavation will no longer be necessary is also spreading – and shared by some Pagans unhappy about the re-excavation of Aubrey Hole 7.
  These attitudes reflect a critical misunderstanding of the nature of archaeological research. Yes, excavation disturbs and removes the deposits it investigates. But it also transforms and creates. Even poor quality excavation (as was most of the work that occurred at Stonehenge until this century) creates more than it destroys – in finds, samples and records, information, stories,inspirationandquestions;andthesethingscontinuetooperatedownthegenerations, touching both specialists and public. This is not, of course, to say that anything but the highest standards of fieldwork should be condoned now, but it explains why we find value in excavations conducted in quite different contexts to our own.
  In a narrow, technical way, archaeological excavation is destructive, even as it generates substantial material for archaeologists to think with; but in a wider cultural sense it is profoundly creative. Whatever we might feel about particular incidents, interpretations or personalities, then, 2008 at Stonehenge was a vintage year. The stories will grow with the
  
telling.
References
There are too many publications to list here about recent Stonehenge work, in print and on the web (including annual reports from the SRP). References in Parker Pearson et al. 2009 offer a good entry to peer reviewed literature. Pitts 2008b is the most up-to-date overview of recent fieldwork, and when viewed online (http://www.britarch. ac.uk/BA/ba102/feat4.shtml) has extensive links to sites maintained by broadcasters and archaeologists; there is also a list of archaeological references, with further online links.
ALEXANDER, C. 2008. If the stones could speak. National Geographic 213(6): 34-59.
ATKINSON, R. 1957. Worms and weathering. Antiquity 31: 219-33.
BBC 2008. Stonehenge – the healing stones. Available at www.bbc.co.uk/history/programmes/stonehenge.
CARVER, M. 2005. Sutton Hoo: a seventh century princely burial ground in context (Reports of the Research Committee of the Society of Antiquaries of London
69). London: British Museum.
CHADBURN, A., J. GARDINER, K. FIELDEN & M. POMEROY-KELLINGER (ed.). 2001. Archaeological research agenda for the Avebury World Heritage site. Salisbury: English Heritage.
CLEAL, R., K. WALKER & R. MONTAGUE. 1995.
Stonehenge in its landscape: twentieth-century excavations (English Heritage Archaeological Report 10). London: English Heritage.
DARVILL, T. 2006. Stonehenge: the biography of a landscape. Stroud: History Press.
–2007. Research frameworks for World Heritage sites and the conceptualization of archaeological knowledge. World Archaeology 39: 436-57.
DARVILL, T. & G. WAINWRIGHT. 2008. Beyond Stonehenge: Carn Meini and the Preseli bluestones. Heritage in Wales 39: 15-19.
DARVILL, T., V. CONSTANT & E. MILNER. 2005.
Stonehenge World Heritage site: an archaeological research framework. London & Bournemouth: English Heritage & Bournemouth University.
DOWNES, J., S. FOSTER, C. WICKHAM-JONES & J.
CALLISTER (ed.). 2005. The heart of Orkney World Heritage site research agenda. Edinburgh: Historic Scotland.
English Heritage. 2008. The future of Stonehenge. Available at http://www.stonehengeconsultation. org.
FOWLES, J. & B. BRUKOFF. 1980. The enigma of Stonehenge. London: Cape.
PARKER PEARSON, M. & RAMILISONINA. 1998.
Stonehenge for the ancestors: the stones pass on the message. Antiquity 72: 308-26.
PARKER PEARSON, M., R. CLEAL, P. MARSHALL, S.
NEEDHAM, J. POLLARD, C. RICHARDS, C. RUGGLES, A. SHERIDAN, J. THOMAS, C. TILLEY, K. WELHAM,
A. CHAMBERLAIN, C. CHENERY, J. EVANS, C. KNUSEL¨	, N. LINFORD, L. MARTIN, J.
MONTGOMERY, A. PAYNE & M. RICHARDS. 2007. The age of Stonehenge. Antiquity 81: 617-39.
PARKER PEARSON, M., A. CHAMBERLAIN, M. JAY, P.
MARSHALL, J. POLLARD, C. RICHARDS, J. THOMAS, C. TILLEY & K. WELHAM. 2009. Who was buried at Stonehenge? Antiquity 83: 23–39.
PITTS, M. 2001. Hengeworld. 2nd edition. London: Arrow.
–2008a. Stonehenge: now what? British Archaeology 99: 10-15.
–2008b. Stonehenge. British Archaeology 102: 12-17.
THORPE, R., O. WILLIAMS-THORPE, D. JENKINS & J. WATSON. 1991. The geological sources and transport of the bluestones of Stonehenge, Wiltshire, UK. Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society 57(2): 103-57.
WAINWRIGHT, G. & I. LONGWORTH. 1971. Durrington Walls: excavations 1966-1968 (Reports of the Research Committee of the Society of Antiquaries of London 29). London: Society of Antiquaries of London.
WHITLEY, J. 2002. Too many ancestors. Antiquity 76: 119-26.
YOUNG, C., A. CHADBURN & I. BEDU. 2008. The Stonehenge World Heritage site management plan consultation draft July 2008. London: English Heritage. Also available at http://www.englishheritage.org.uk/server/show/nav.8670.
A year at Stonehenge
  
Mike Pitts
  
184
  
185
  

  
184
  
